Okay, I'm back with Ada Palmer, who's a
science fiction author, composer,
historian at the University of Chicago.
Ada, this time I want to talk to you
about Machiavelli.
>> Yes.
>> So, he writes The Prince, he dedicates
it to Lorenzo de Piero de Medici, and uh
gives it to him 1513, and he says in the
final chapter, "You're the only person
who can bring Italy from its current
place of ruin and ravage." Why were
things so bad? What is the historical
context in which he's writing The
Prince?
>> So, I'm going to give a two-part answer
to that, although of course with any
granular history, there can be many
parts. Uh but the papacy is part of it,
and then the city-state structure of
Italy is another part of it. And I'll
start with the city-state structure.
There's a principle in politics that
when there's long continuity of a
government, and the government has been
in power a long time, that government
has a lot of legitimacy. People believe
in its institutions, people are used to
it, even if you complain about it, it's
the government, etc. When you break
that,
when you overthrow the ruler, when you
dissolve the republic, when you put in a
new thing,
it doesn't have that same staying power.
And so, it's very common when there's
one regime change for there to then be
five regime changes rapid-fire over and
over. We see this with how many
iterations the French Republic goes
through. French Republic and then
restored monarchy and then republic and
then monarchy. When a long thing cracks,
boom boom boom boom boom, you get chaos.
Uh England's Wars of the Roses are
similar. There was one stable dynasty
for a long time. The moment that a king
is overthrown, then you have overthrow
overthrow overthrow overthrow for a long
time, because the thread of continuity
was cut.
In Machiavelli's lifetime, that thread
of continuity is cut for the majority of
cities in Italy.
And that guarantees from his perspective
that there's going to be more and more
and more and more overthrows in those
governments. Because if when Machiavelli
was born, there were six or seven
city-states in Italy that had had their
governments uprooted recently. By the
time he's writing The Prince, it's
dozens and it's in fact the majority of
these places. So, it's volatile.
Almost no government has staying power.
Almost every government is ripe for yet
another replacement, yet another
replacement, yet another replacement.
That's half the answer of why he
perceives there to be this urgency and
this guarantee that there cannot be
stability.
The other half is the papacy.
Uh and the papacy, of course, is a long
and evolving organism, right? The papacy
is one of the oldest institutions in the
world now. It was one of the oldest
institutions of the world even then,
even though this is 500 years ago. And
as we all know, when you have power
centralized in an authority, especially
an executive, there can be changes in
how that executive uses that power. And
each one sets norms for the next one.
And over the course of Machiavelli's
lifetime and just before, a bunch of
consecutive popes expanded executive
power and especially the military side
and launched more wars or did more
arbitrary overthrow of governments.
Because you have a number of city-states
that are directly ruled by the papacy.
And in theory, the pope can appoint
anybody to be ruler of that city.
And here is a pope. He has an
illegitimate son. He wants his
illegitimate son to be ruler of
something, so
he overthrows the government of a city
and puts in his son.
The next pope does it to three cities.
The next pope does it to five. And soon
we have a precedent that every new pope
feels he has the authority to knock down
every pawn upon the chessboard if he
feels like it.
Once that is the norm, even a fairly
nice pope still inherits the idea that
the pope is going to overthrow and
replace governments. And this creates a
unique instability within Italy that no
other part of Europe is subject to
because there is no predictability to
who's going to be Pope next. It isn't
hereditary. You can't plan for it. The
next Pope is elected. As is often the
case with elections, very frequently the
next Pope will be elected by a coalition
of all the people who hate the current
Pope.
>> Mhm.
>> And one of the things that electoral
politics does is that it tends to swing
in which those outside of power work
hard to get into power with the next
regime. Which means if we assume that
and the average length of a papacy is 10
years in this period, every 10 years you
suddenly have a completely unpredictable
new monarch who's almost guaranteed to
be one of the enemies of the old monarch
and will therefore rip up and replace
all of the things that that monarch
tried to do with new things.
So Machiavelli, when he's writing the
last chapter of The Prince, is looking
around and saying, "Okay, we have
a perfect storm
of practically every polity in this
region has just had the threat of
legitimacy cut.
Its institutions have no traditions. Its
people have no investment in its current
rulers. These are all pawns that have
been knocked over before and barely
stood up again. They're ready to fall.
And meanwhile, nothing will stop the
turnover of Popes. The only thing that
could stop the turnover of Popes would
be one person gaining enough power and
ascendancy near this region
who has staying power, who has sons and
heredity, that he can do what Cesare
Borgia tried to do and have enough power
near the papacy to strongly influence
the next Pope to create a kind of
stability that's otherwise impossible.
>> Mhm. So he wants the Medicis basically
to not unify Italy, but stabilize Italy
at the very least.
>> Exactly. By having conquered enough of a
chunk
>> Yes.
>> that the papacy fears them and must
negotiate with them as opposed to the
papacy being surrounded by small,
weakened powers that will constantly be
turned over and turned over and turned
over.
>> And the Pope now is a Medici, right?
>> At that moment, yes.
>> So,
it makes it even more possible.
Let's lay down a little more historical
context. So,
before Machiavelli writes The Prince,
he's a sort of bureaucratic diplomat.
And he meets through his career
a lot of these famous figures. I want to
know what he makes, for example, of King
Louis of France, of Maximilian of
Germany, the Holy Roman Empire. I want
to know what he made of Cesare Borgia.
>> Yeah. He spends a lot of The Prince in
fact trying to veil how much more he
cares about Cesare Borgia than everyone
else. It's so interesting. He tries to
be balanced. He tries to talk about this
example and this example and this
example and Valentino and this example
and and and sometimes he just can't,
right? And there's that incredible
magical moment when he's discussing
Valentino's fall.
Uh and the moment when he has amassed
all this power, he's successfully
conquered almost everything within
Italy, and then suddenly both his
father, the Pope, and him fall ill at
once.
And when Machiavelli describes this and
he's saying that everything Cesare
Borgia did, he did right. He conquered
this kingdom, he would have kept it. The
only reason he lost it was fortune. And
what Machiavelli should say is
Valentino had planned for every
contingency at his father's death except
the possibility that he would also be on
death's door. But that's not what
Machiavelli says. What Machiavelli says
is he told me that he had planned. The
first person breaks in. Our historian
cannot veil himself anywhere. He cares
too much. He told me, first person, that
he had prepared for everything at the
event of his father's death except the
possibility that he himself would also
be incapacitated at the moment. And it's
such a magical moment where the veil
between the author and the reader breaks
for just that moment and we're like,
"Oh, yes, all of these others he
observed from a distance. But
Machiavelli was in the room next to
Valentino at Valentino's side through
this and had the most incredible
life-changing first-person view of this
man so unique and charismatic and
terrifying that when you read accounts
of him, they range from this was the
most incredible charismatic leader I've
ever met to this man was supernaturally
charismatic to the degree that he must
be literally the Antichrist or an
incarnation of the angel of death on
earth cuz I have no other explanation of
how he could be so persuasive and
charismatic and Machiavelli was in the
room.
And every so often you just feel that
he's still in the spell of this
incredible figure at whose side he had
the scariest job in the world, right?
Cuz Machiavelli's job dealing with
Cesare Borgia is it's very clear that
the Borgia plan is to conquer the Papal
States in the middle of Italy and
Tuscany, Florence's dominion is this
little notch like a puzzle piece out of
the side of the Papal States and anybody
with a map looking at it is like, "You
got to conquer that. You just have to
conquer this. You can't have a kingdom
without it. You have to."
There is no way to stop it. So, what do
you do? Machiavelli's advice to his
polity is
this time we're not going to succeed in
persuading this conqueror to pass us by.
We can't bribe him into doing something
else permanently.
But we can buy time.
And we can
absolutely and abjectly swear to do
anything he wants. So, we can give him
our forces and we can give him our
money. We can pay him and help him
conquer the rest of it
and betray our allies, betray Bologna,
which Florence had had a 300-year
alliance to defend Bologna. He said, "We
have to break it. The whole world is
broken right now. We have to break every
promise and every hereditary alliance we
had. We must be at the side of this man
and the only possible survival mechanism
is to win from him through loyalty,
through support, and through Machiavelli
being at his ear whispering, "Forever
Florence is loyal. Florence is loyal."
By that, we buy the boon of Polyphemus,
the terrifying promise of the conqueror,
"I like you, my guest. I'll eat you
last."
That's the republic's only hope.
And that's Machiavelli's job is to stand
next to the scariest man who has lived
in Europe since Frederick Barbarossa
and whisper constantly at his ear, "The
Florentine Republic will support you and
will give your grace anything you ask.
Just eat us last."
>> Doesn't it contradict what he's saying
in The Prince about never rise with the
help of great powers for even in success
you have empowered somebody who's
stronger than you and who's at mercy
you're at?
>> I mean, this is not Florence aiming to
rise. This is not Florence expecting
that it will gain anything by this. This
is Florence knowing it will lose.
Uh and Machiavelli's very open about the
fact if Alexander had lived another year
Valentino would have finished his
conquest and taken Florence and taken it
at last and it would have been over.
Um but popes are mortal.
And buying time is sometimes the
survival mechanism.
>> Yeah.
>> And so, Machiavelli has this incredible
first-hand experience of being with
Valentino through all of these
decisions, being with him at the
massacre at Senigallia, when you know,
rumor had reached Valentino that some of
his people were terrified of him and
plotting to overthrow him. And then they
were so scared of him they decided to
abandon the plot and he heard and he met
with them and told them, "I forgive you.
It's okay. You know, you've renewed your
loyalty to me. You've passed the test. I
trust you. All is well." And then he
invites them to the banquet and then
massacres them all.
The forgiveness is false. The betrayals
are punished. There's this amazing
letter that's
uh a couple months afterward where
Machiavelli's loved ones are writing
from Florence because they've received a
letter from him after the massacre at
Sinigaglia. And they say, "Oh, thank God
you're alive.
We had no idea. All we heard was that he
had massacred a large number of the
people who were with him. We didn't know
if you were alive because it took months
in the chaos the postal system had
completely break broken down, right? It
took months for them to get word that
Machiavelli was still alive. They didn't
know whether he had been caught up in
the conspiracy. He easily could have
been on a list of names uh of people the
conspirators intended to recruit and and
be gone.
Uh so his wife and his loved ones back
at home, his children had to wait months
to find out whether he, too, uh had been
slaughtered and it felt to them like a
miracle that he hadn't.
Um but it meant that he watched these
incredible deeds of you encounter them,
you forgive them, you renew vows of
amity, sacred vows taken in the
cathedral, and then you slaughter them
at dinner violating the laws of
hospitality, right? That Dante would say
if you do that,
uh you've committed such a grave sin
that you're not just regular damned, a
devil comes up out of hell and takes
your soul out of your body and inhabits
you. Uh and that you're actually already
in hell even though your body is still
alive on earth. I guess that's how
heinous a sin this is. And yet,
it works. And all the rest of
Valentino's men are more loyal to him
afterward than ever before and won't
even whisper to each other about
dissatisfaction because even the
faintest whiff of conspiracy might
result in
death.
>> Mhm.
>> So, why does Valentino's kingdom, which
he did everything right, ultimately fall
apart? Because he happens to eat the
same thing that gives him food poisoning
as his father and happens to be
[clears throat] ill at the wrong moment.
And also the puppet that he manages to
get in power, Pius the third, dies too
fast. Uh and then he's outmaneuvered by
Julius. If all those things hadn't gone
wrong in a row,
the kingdom would have stood and indeed
he would have conquered Florence. So,
Machiavelli is constantly reminding us
that yes, we have all of these things we
can try to do. We can remember it's
better to be feared than loved. We can
remember not to be hated. We have power
over maximum half of what causes
outcomes. The other half is always going
to be fortune, right? Cuz we look at
Machiavelli, we know he's the origin of
utilitarian thought and that he says we
need to evaluate people's deeds based on
outcome. But he doesn't just say we need
to evaluate their deeds based on
outcome. We He says we need to evaluate
their deeds based on what the most
probable outcome was
before fortune intervened.
And so he says, "People look at
Valentino Borgia and say, 'But the
Borgias fell. They were feared and then
they were hated and then they fell and
then their enemies took power and then
chiseled their coats of arms off of
every surface in Rome, so that to this
day you're walking through Rome and you
sit down at a pizzeria and there's a
weird scar on the wall and that scar is
where the Borgia bull is no more,
right?'" And people want to make the
moral of that be don't do what the
Borgias did, they fell. And
Machiavelli's like, "No, they did not
fall because of their choices. They fell
because half of what happens in the
world is never in our control. And you
can do everything right and it's out of
your control, but we have to evaluate
what would have happened
and therefore we should imitate them,
because everything they did was right."
>> I think one misconception of a
Machiavelli that I had, because I had
not read these books before, um
is that he says the means don't matter,
the end matters. And there's a virtue
ethics sense in which maybe he doesn't
think the means matter, but like he is
way more concerned about the means than
I would have imagined that he thinks the
means are incredibly important because
the means by which you achieve power
determine how stable and how fruitful
that power will be
in the context of military conflicts he
says if you achieve some power with the
help of mercenaries or with the help of
great powers people who become stronger
than you as a result of you achieving
power that is a very precarious spot to
be in. But speaking of Julius
he makes another point that if you
achieve your power by lying, by breaking
oaths, by being unfaithful that this is
okay because
his view is that people will forget that
you are not faithful. They will just
take you at your at your word the next
time they encounter you. And so it's um
it's it's actually a very interesting
meditation on what by what means can you
achieve power that will make that power
stable versus not. And the fact that he
thinks
breaking your word is totally fine
>> Well, it's more than similar than that.
>> yeah.
>> It's even similar than that because it's
if you are someone who breaks your word
and you break it this way, it'll bite
you in the ass. And if you break it
these ways, it'll be okay. Because he
also does analysis of figures like
Savonarola
uh who would make prophecies and
promises and then some of them would
happen and some of them wouldn't and
then he would make new ones and sort of
correct what he said yesterday and he
handled
his manipulation and untruths badly in
Machiavelli's analysis in a way that did
turn people against him and make him
lose power partly because Savonarola as
a religious demagogue the
core of his power was people believing
that he was divinely inspired and that
he wouldn't make mistakes and wouldn't
err. And so his power base was fragile
vis-a-vis untruth.
And for him because of the specific
shape of his power and then the specific
way he handled his contradictions, that
did hurt him. Whereas, if it's somebody
like Cesare Borgia who will make an
alliance and work with that ally for a
while and then betray them, because
meanwhile he was such an effective
conqueror and he was so scare scary
and everyone was so afraid of him, even
when he would betray an ally, his other
allies would say,
"I got to be more faithful to him
so that the next person he betrays isn't
me."
>> Mhm.
>> Uh and and try to work hard to be in the
good graces of the prince so that I'm
not next as opposed to turning on him
because he was so scary. Savonarola was
not scary. Savonarola was charismatic
and persuasive and, you know, had one of
these voices that made you made crowds
thrill and women swoon and decades later
when people asked Michelangelo what
Savonarola had been like when Savonarola
had been dead for decades, right,
Michelangelo's answer was, "I still hear
his voice." Right, he had one of those
charismatic presences that wasn't enough
when he started flip-flopping on policy
and truth. Whereas Valentino was so
scary that he could betray his top
general and
seize his lands and overthrow his city
and all of his other generals would say,
"Better step even further into line."
>> Yeah.
>> So, it's not just that lying is okay,
it's that lying is sometimes okay if you
check these other boxes and it's not if
you don't. So, this is even more
reinforcement of he zooms in so much on
the means.
And if you do A and B, you're okay, but
if you do A and C, you're not. Looking
at the minutiae of different ways you
can wield power and different reasons
people can have to follow you. If you're
a prince who's decided to invest it in
being loved, you have to keep it up.
Uh or cultivate being feared alongside
it. If you've invested heavily in being
feared, there are things you can then do
that you can't do if you're a prince
whose power depends on being loved.
>> Mhm. And this actually gets so the the
famous quote in the prince I had is
better to be feared than loved. Um what
he's getting at there is I think he's
just like very cynical about people's
nature and if people make you a promise
they'll just go back on it. If your
power base depends on people's promises
and loyalties as soon as you your rule
seems tottering they'll go back on it.
Whereas if your rule depends on people
just having expectation that if they
break their oath to you they'll be
punished. That's my more stable. But he
his um his cynicism about he basically
thinks people will act as badly as they
are allowed to. I mean
his whole justification of checks and
balances is not dissimilar to the
founders of the US and their reason for
wanting checks and balances and wanting
to put different factions against each
other. Which is like he just quite is
kind of cynical and thinks people will
just act as badly as you allow them to.
>> on that topic Machiavelli is the first
person that we have ever in the European
tradition to suggest that it could be
viable for there to be more than one
political party in a state at the same
time.
>> Mhm.
>> And that they would compete against each
other and sort of vent the society's
tensions through competition and vie to
try to dominate an election and then the
next one. This is what we're used to.
Uh this is innovative in Machiavelli.
Machiavelli talks about how competition
within a city if the parties are kind of
stable. He's observing Siena as one of
the examples of this can vent local
uh tensions and allow interior
adjustments if one has power.
>> Mhm.
>> And the norm the standard attitude
toward political parties is if there are
two political parties in a polity it
will not be stable until one of those
political parties is dead and their
heads have been cut off and put on
spikes and their houses have been burned
down and paved over. That has been
Florence's solution to political parties
before.
Uh Florence massacred its Ghibellines
and killed all of them and razed salt
into the earth where the houses used to
be so nothing can grow there. Nothing
still grows there.
Um and then when the Black Guelphs and
the White Guelphs split into two
sub-parties, they immediately started
slaughtering each other as well. The
standard was one party must wipe out the
other party for there to be stability.
And there are comparatively few
examples, although Florence's neighbor
Siena is one, where political parties
managed to not only coexist side by
side, but be politically helpful.
>> One element of governance or of being a
good prince
at the time I didn't appreciate that
Machiavelli makes a huge point of is
how
formidable
and reputable
people consider you to be. And so that's
relevant both from preventing others
from invading you or from extracting
concessions from other people. So in his
diplomatic career, he is sent out to a
bunch of different foreign polities to
basically be like, "Hey, is this a
serious person?" So Maximilian is trying
to extract a bribe from Florence
basically to not invade Florence on his
way down to Italy. And Florence says,
"Go check out if this guy's for real."
>> Yeah.
>> And he has to make some judgment about
this person.
>> Well, and and it's usually Florence has
paid these bribes a lot, right?
Florence's tactic is is someone invading
the area, can we bribe them?
>> Right.
>> Uh because paying somebody to not attack
you is a much more sure fire thing than
preparing to actually fight against
them. Your family's lands get trampled
by soldiers. You suffer economically.
Uh so it's an old Florentine tactic.
It's not a new thing that Maximilian is
threatening to invade Italy and trying
to extract a bribe. Florence basically
every year is like, "Okay, who do we
need to bribe this year to not invade
us?"
>> Right.
>> Uh here's this year's bribing a king
budget.
To whom does it go? Is Maximilian a a
serious threat or are we saving this
money in case there's a threat from
somebody more serious like the King of
Naples or the King of France or Milan or
or the Venetians or something.
>> A couple weeks ago, Cursor saved a
podcast. I was helping some friends
record, and we shot for several hours.
Everything ran normally, but when I went
to send the footage, one of the video
files was corrupted. I tried all the
obvious fixes, but I couldn't get
anything to work. So, I pointed Cursor
at it.
Cursor uses command-line tool called
untrunc to recover the video. Untrunc is
pretty easy to use, but it only works if
you have a clean reference file from the
same camera that produced the corrupted
footage. Cursor tracked down a viable
reference file without any prompting,
and it used the file's metadata to make
sure that it came from the same camera.
Once untrunc recovered the video, I
asked Cursor to fix the out-of-sync
audio, as well. It ran this complicated
FFmpeg command that I would have never
come up with myself, and it just
realigned everything. You should try
using Cursor for your daily work. My
whole team has been using it for
ordinary tasks associated with the
podcast. Go to cursor.com/smartcash
to get started.
At this time,
the um the Pope is not just a spiritual
leader, but a temporal power. So, he's
like him and his son are literally
fighting wars against other Catholics,
but the other Catholics are fighting
them back. Like, what is it What does it
mean to be a Catholic who's fighting a
war against the Pope?
>> So, here is where geographic proximity
is everything.
Because from the perspective of if
you're far from Rome,
right? When you're
Denmark or Iceland, and the Pope is all
the way over there, and the way you
interact with him is that occasionally
an incredibly impressive papal legate
will visit, and there'll be vast pomp
and circumstance, and the city will
rename a street in honor of the fact
that somebody sent by the Pope has
visited, and he has this great power to
say yes or no to petitions, and you
know, different countries have been
trying to petition for specific things
for ages, and the Pope's legate is here
to, you know, interview the emperor to
judge whether the queen can be queen or
not. And it feels like a big deal. And
the pope is very abstract. It's easy to
have a lot of respect for that pope.
Because what do you see that pope do?
You see that pope in pomp and
circumstance. You see that pope make
judgments about fates of popes and
kings. You see that pope um
uh put out papal bulls and edicts that
give theological answers to questions.
You see that pope exercise judgment of
life or death over people at a distance.
He's very abstract. And the difference
between one pope and the next pope is
kind of small from your perspective. You
don't see their policy differences.
If you're in Italy,
the pope is that who went to
college with your brother
and beat him up
>> [laughter]
>> when they were at college. And then, you
know, was drunk and irresponsible in
middle age. And you've been negotiating
with him in these other jobs. And you
know this jerk. You know his family. You
know the other jerks who are also
competitors for this. You're allied to
him. You're not allied to him. Uh his
ancestors are allies of yours or not
allies of yours. He's a specific dude.
And you're much more likely to judge a
pope based on he's that guy. Right? This
is not Pope Julius II. This is Giuliano
della Rovere. And I judge him based on
his uncle who put him in power and the
actions of his friends and the actions
of the city he's from. And you know all
of his dirty laundry. And you are
subject to the fact that when he moves
into power, everyone who's related to
him is going to get promoted within
Italy. Everybody who's not is going to
get removed from Italy. So, it's much
easier for an Italian to see this pope.
And that's actually quite hard to see
the papacy.
And that's how you have these
fascinating wars where
even the cities that are hereditarily
incredibly loyal to the papacy, well,
they'll sometimes be fighting a war
against the papacy. Mhm. So, all Italy
is divided into these two factions, the
Guelphs and Ghibellines.
Theoretically,
what these two factions mean is that
Guelph powers, Guelph families, Guelph
cities, they believe the correct
successor to the Roman emperors is the
Pope. The Pope is the emperor. He has
the right to be the ruler of Italy and
indeed of everything that was once
Rome's. He is the ultimate political,
the ultimate military power, and he is
the rightful and only rightful overlord
of Italy.
The Ghibellines believe that in 800 AD,
when Charlemagne conquered a bunch of
stuff and made the empire that we now
refer to as the Holy Roman Empire,
empire,
when the Pope crowned Charlemagne, he
delegated
the political and military side of his
authority to that emperor and made
himself be the spiritual authority, but
the emperor be the political and
temporal authority, right?
And therefore,
the rightful ruler of Italy is the
emperor, the successors of Charlemagne.
These are the two factions for which
these parties fought originally.
300 years ago, these days what these
factions actually mean is those jerks
murdered Uncle Tibalt and we will never
forgive them. So, they are the team that
is our enemy and we are this team and
they are that team and we hate them and
we want to crush them because they want
to crush us.
Which means that sometimes a Pope will
be elected who's from a hereditarily
Ghibelline family.
And the Pope will start promoting people
from the anti-papal faction and the
pro-papal faction will unite against the
Pope.
Which makes no rational sense. When
until we remember that they are serving
the Pope abstractly.
So, you get multiple situations where
there's a war between Rome and Florence
over the fact that Florence wants to
defend papal authority in papal lands
against the Pope itself because that
individual Pope is from the anti-papal
faction.
>> Do they not believe that he is the vicar
of Christ on Earth?
I mean, it makes sense in a normal
political
state for you to think, I believe in
America, but I don't like the president
or something. But like, isn't the Pope
supposed to be
>> Yes and no. Again, when you're far away,
yes. When you're close up, you know too
much of the dirty laundry of these
people. Right? So, let me use what a fun
example. The most passive-aggressive
letter ever written in the entire
history of time, in my opinion.
There's a type of
ceremony that happens when the new Pope
is elected, which is the giving of oaths
of obedience.
A major ambassador from every polity in
Christendom comes to Rome.
And they wait in line for a long time,
and then they give a speech.
A long-winded speech about how great the
monarch is that they're there to
represent, and how vast his power is,
blah blah blah blah blah, and how pious
he is, and how how glad he is, Your
Holiness, that you're the Pope now.
Congratulations on behalf of my
wonderful king. And you're supposed to
send like the highest status possible
person who can leave your polity without
it falling down. You might send a
younger son of the king. You might send
a Lord Chancellor. In the case of
Florence, you're going to send the most
prominent citizen you can. So, when Pope
Sixtus was elected, it was Lorenzo de
Medici himself, not the dedicati of the
prince, the grandfather and namesake of
the dedicati of the prince, who went to
deliver this oration of obedience, which
means literally prostrating yourself in
front of the Pope,
literally kissing his feet, uh and
giving this oath.
Lorenzo did this for Pope Sixtus, with
whom he was negotiating to try
desperately to get a cardinalship for
his brother.
Pope Sixtus instead organized the Pazzi
conspiracy to try to butcher the Medici
family, killed Lorenzo's brother,
uh killed a number of his allies as
well, and attempted to have a coup to
take over Florence.
When the next Pope was elected after
Sixtus, Pope Innocent, who was as
everyone knew a puppet of the same
faction that Sixtus was from. So, we go
from
this very dangerous Pope who had tried
to wipe out Lorenzo's family to a puppet
of the same faction.
Lorenzo sent his son instead of himself
to go give this oath. And a comp- had
his son go to deliver the message,
uh apologize to his holiness that I
could not come myself, but the last time
this duty fell upon me, I had a brother
upon whom I could leave the
the burden of the state in my absence.
Since now I have no brother, I cannot
come in person.
It's a very respectful letter, but it's
also very overt about the fact that he
does not trust and will not again trust
this faction, right? So, they negotiate
very carefully how to deal with the fact
that the Popes have this great spiritual
power, but sometimes the Popes are
acting as horrifically selfish warlords.
That's also something which has worsened
over time.
And
it's important for us to remember that
the papacy becomes gradually more
corrupted over time.
This is because with every generation
more people leave donations of wealth to
the church, you know, a widow who has no
son and has property decides to piously
leave this to a monastery, the church
gets wealthier and wealthier. As the
church gets wealthier
with wealth comes power, more and more
power is in the state. This makes a
stronger and stronger incentive for
every ambitious family to send their
second son into the church.
And this goes all the way down, right?
We have personal letters of Machiavelli
writing to and from relatives of his
where they're debating, what is the
correct sized bribe to offer to buy a
priesthood for his little brother Toto?
Uh they don't want to offer too big a
bribe because it would impoverish the
family. They don't want to offer too
small a bribe. They've heard that
another family that's after this
priesthood has offered an extra big
bribe. That's kind of not fair. How do
they respond to being out bribed? They
just write about this as the most
everyday normal thing in the world. And
this is a, you know, wealthy merchant
prince level family. They are in the top
5% of wealth and power in Florence, but
not in the top 1%, right? But for them,
too, it's normal to talk about paying a
bribe to get a priesthood. That's just
how it works.
And
every generation sees the church get
wealthier and have more power, and
therefore the incentives to corrupt it
are even greater.
It even becomes a kind of a prisoner's
dilemma system because if you're the
duke and you don't manipulate the
papacy, if you don't bribe the pope, if
you don't work hard to get your brother
to be bishop, and your enemies do,
you're screwed.
So you even see it as defensive. I must
manipulate the church.
It's the only way my people will be
safe. If I don't manipulate the church,
my enemies may manipulate the church,
and then
uh there's danger. And this happens all
the way up on the scale of kings where
popes can make your enemy the most
powerful bishop in your kingdom, or can
deny you the right to marry because
inevitably the person you want to marry
is a cousin and you're going to need a
special dispensation to marry them, and
the pope can prevent that and mess with
your marriage alliances. Uh you need the
pope very desperately if you're a king.
You also need the pope all the way down.
And that means bribes and other kind of
incentives make the papacy more and
corrupt with each generation.
So, the papacy is worse in everyone's
lived experience than it used to be even
a few Popes ago.
And you see every generation for 100
years say, "Popes are much worse now
than Popes used to be when I was young."
>> Mhm.
>> Right? Everybody says that. Dante says
that in 1300.
Um
uh Machiavelli's
uh grandparent generation are saying
that in 1400.
Machiavelli is saying that in 1500. In
everybody's lived experience, the Popes
are getting more secular, more military,
and more corrupt over time. It's a
gradual accumulation, and it comes to a
peak
as such things do,
uh triggering the Reformation. When it
come becomes so bad that there has to be
a massive move against it. And
Machiavelli, in interesting way,
anticipates this because Machiavelli
says, "All institutions are gradually
corrupted and need to be reformed and
returned to their foundations, or they
will collapse under the weight of their
corruption." He says he thinks that the
papacy has been undergoing this, and
that Christianity has been undergoing
this. And that if not for the fact that
St. Francis of Assisi, also to some
extent St. Dominic, a couple centuries
before his time, reformed the church and
brought in a lot more popular support,
Christianity would already have cracked
under the weight of its own corruption
200 years before. And that it will need
such a restoration again as any
institution needs, as city governments
need, as republics need, as corruption
accumulates over time.
>> Mhm.
One big way in which our world is
different from 500 years ago is this uh
the focus on patronage and that being
the basis of political power. It was
much more prominent, right? So, I I that
that is something I think would be
interesting to understand.
>> Well, it's it's not that it was just
more prominent, but it was the
fundamental glue of the society as
opposed to one of several glues of the
society.
And, you know, patronage, which was also
familial and therefore entangled with
nepotism,
uh was so fundamental that, you know,
for example, when Alessandro Farnese was
elected Pope Paul III in the middle of
the 1500s,
he didn't corruptly make one of his
kinsmen commander of the papal armies.
He instead appointed a really competent,
experienced general instead of his own
not very competent illegitimate son.
And there were riots in Rome. Your
Holiness,
the people demand more nepotism. You
must appoint your illegitimate son to
command your armies because your
illegitimate son will never betray you.
And we will know we can trust the papal
armies not to turn on Rome
if the Pope's son is the commander, and
we don't know that about this other
commander. He might turn against Your
Holiness, and there might be a rift
between the Pope and the papal armies if
he's not somebody that rises and falls
with you the way your son does.
Therefore, by popular demand, the people
want more nepotism because the system
depends on it.
>> Mhm.
>> Right? And that's why you see how the
system depends on there are levels of
trust that the patronage system creates
because it involves multi-generational
entanglement of families, where if these
families rise, they rise together. If
they fall, they fall together, which
creates levels of trust that can sustain
things like this world, where the oath
of a soldier is to his commander, not to
the polity that he serves.
And in modernity, we realize another
solution to that is the oath of the
soldier is not to the commander. The
oath of the soldier is to the
constitution or to the country,
uh or to the people. But in this period,
the oath of the soldier is to the
commander, mostly because communications
are so slow that the commander has to be
able to give speedy field commands. But
it means you're creating an army and
you're handing it to a man. And if you
cannot trust that man, then the people
will be terrified that there could be a
rift between Rome and its own armies, or
between Rome and its treasurer, or
between Rome and its other allies.
Uh patronage is the glue that makes
things work all the way down.
>> Mhm.
>> Uh all the way down to the level of if
you need
a defense attorney,
that's done through patronage. The
outcomes of trials are really great way
to see patronage. So, we're all familiar
with the fact that law codes in the
Middle Ages are really cruel, right? And
it's like death for everything, death
for theft, death for adultery, death for
homosexuality, death for setting fire to
the prince's beehive.
Uh whatever it is, you know, that's the
sentence on the books. And then you look
at the actual trial records, and maybe
one in a hundred convictions for that
crime actually ends in a capital
sentence. And almost all of the other
ones end in a fine or a public flogging,
but not in the sentence that's on the
books. And we say, "Why and how is that
happening?" Patronage is the answer.
So, if it's the Middle Ages or the
Renaissance and you're a
carpenter
and your teenage son gets drunk and he
punches somebody in a brawl and breaks
the guy's nose in that way that makes
him die, and accidentally kills a guy in
a drunken brawl, and your son is now on
trial for murder.
You're a carpenter. You therefore have
worked for the rich family whose family
carpenter you are, right? Let's say it's
the Medici family. Whenever they need
new pews for the family church or new
furniture or repairs for the family
gates, they go to you. So, you go to
them and you say, "My son is in danger.
He's on trial. Please put in a good
word.
And your patron
has
the ability to then influence the
judges.
And they will put in a good word for you
and then you will get a lighter
sentence. This is a sort of an ancestor
of what having a character witness is
to say but so-and-so is such a good
person they should have the milder
punishment not the more severe one. But
the norm is you're accused of a more
severe crime you're put on trial for
your life.
Your patron intervenes and you get a
lighter sentence.
And this is how justice is supposed to
work. And this is a very severe line
that changes in this 18th century with
the Enlightenment. Because we now think
of proportional justice. The sentence
for the crime should be this.
And ideal justice is everyone who is
guilty of the crime gets that sentence.
That is fair. It doesn't matter who you
know. It doesn't matter whether you're
rich or poor the sentence should be the
same. This is the ideal of enlightened
justice.
The ideal of this period's justice which
is much more shaped by Christianity is
the purpose of the trial is the
spiritual interior correction of the
soul of the sinner.
And therefore the ideal outcome is for
them to fear for their life. They're
before a terrifying judge who is the
earthly representation of God. And
they're before him they know that
they're guilty and they deserve to be
thrown into the the pits of hell. But
miraculously they are given grace
and they are pardoned. And the process
of being put on trial, fearing for your
life, begging to the patron, and then
receiving mercy is supposed to sort of
be an earthly preview of the process
your soul will undergo when you are
before divine judgment. And therefore
should make you come out the other end a
good person. And the goal of the justice
system is the spiritual improvement of
the the in the hope that they will come
out the other end better and more likely
to go to heaven. Even when the people
are being sentenced to death,
uh there are religious organizations who
sit with them overnight having a final
prayer group and walk with them to the
gallows holding their hand.
Uh and and holding a
painting of the Virgin Mary in front of
their face so that to the very last
moment the person who's about to be
executed is thinking about heaven.
Uh and the ideal outcome of the
execution is that the soul goes to
heaven. So, the whole structure of the
justice system expects the intervention
of a patron who represents the
intervention of a patron saint uh
persuading the judge who is God to give
you mercy. So, when we see a hundred
trials end in 99 the person paid a small
fine and one of the person was executed,
what that actually means is 99 their
patron stepped in.
And somebody persuaded somebody who put
in a good word, who got the weight ends,
and one
that [snorts] person had fallen out of
the patronage network.
That person had angered their boss,
their protector. That's why it went all
the way to being a capital offense.
Probably a lot of people listening
uh are familiar with Giordano Bruno,
very famous as a martyr for science
because he was burnt at the stake by the
Inquisition.
Uh fewer people know that that was not
his first Inquisition trial. He was
investigated a number of times by the
Inquisition
uh for doing various radical uh forms of
thought. The earlier trials had the
usual outcome for that kind of trial of
he had a patron, there was rich people
that he worked with or for, or the
university was hosting him, they put in
a good word, he's fine. Uh the
Inquisition tells him be good,
uh and things continue as they are.
That time he had angered the person he
worked for. He pissed off his patron.
And it's his patron who turns him into
the Inquisition
and says, "This guy is a charlatan. He
promised he could teach me these things
that he can't. I don't trust him. He's
no good. Throw the book at him." And the
reason that trial goes all the way to a
capital sentence is that he doesn't have
a patron. He's the 99th case that time.
>> Mhm.
>> And if he had had a patron protecting
him, despite how radical his stuff was,
he would have been okay. And we see that
in the trial of Giovanni Pico della
Mirandola, who was candidly
substantially more radical than Giordano
Bruno.
Uh but when Pico is on trial, Lorenzo
de' Medici and other powerful people
really care about Pico, and they pull it
out all the stops. And you know, Lorenzo
talks to his brother-in-law, who's an
Orsini. The Orsini have enormous
influence in Rome. They get permission
for Pico to be let go and sent home to
Lorenzo to sort of live under house
arrest under Lorenzo's promise that
he'll be good from then on. Or uh
Marsilio Ficino, right? Who is this
radical Platonist who publishes a book
on how to project your soul outside of
time and summon angels and arguing for
the existence of reincarnation and and
is very clearly being extremely
theologically weird. This is the man who
wrote the best letter of recommendation
ever written in the history of time when
he was recommending a young scholar for
a job with the King of Hungary. Uh and
he writes in the recommendation letter,
"This young man is the reincarnation of
Saint Thomas Aquinas. So, you should
give him a job." Now, that is a letter
of recommendation. But you're like, "The
reincarnation of Saint Thomas Aquinas,
huh?" And the Inquisition comes knocking
on Ficino's door and is like, "Mhm, uh
>> [clears throat]
>> reincarnation?" And Ficino's like, "Oh,
no. Uh
help. Talk to Lorenzo." Lorenzo talks to
his brother, Cardinal Orsini. Cardinal
Orsini shuts it down. And Ficino is
told,
"Mhm, maybe lay off talking quite so
overtly about the uh
uh about the reincarnation." And Ficino
says, "Yes, of course. And I will only
teach very pious people how to summon
angels and project their souls out of
their bodies. I promise I won't teach it
to anybody who will use these powers
irresponsibly. The Inquisition is like,
"Okay." And goes home. Because patronage
kicked in.
Uh and patronage is the glue that makes
everything work. Cuz you can't even stay
in a hotel
or buy an apple. I'm not kidding.
Without a patron.
Um because you, you know, you arrive at
a city, nobody knows you, you're a
stranger. What you have is a letter of
recommendation
from your patron who's friends with some
important person there. You present that
at the hotel. That's why they let you
stay.
>> Okay, I'm here with Ricson who is an ML
researcher at Jane Street. Ricson, I'm
sure you saw that there were many viral
memes on Twitter about the hiring
process at Jane Street.
>> Yeah.
>> And so I wanted to see for myself, what
is the hiring process at Jane Street
actually like?
>> Yeah, so here's one of our uh retired
puzzle questions. Here we've got an
image data set, but half the images in
it have been corrupted. But they've been
like scrambled in a consistent way. Like
if the pixel on the top right got like
swapped with the pixel in the middle,
like the same swap happened for like all
of the images in the second half of the
data set.
>> Uh a super naive thing then would just
be like training a classifier on
corrupted versus uncorrupted images.
>> Yeah, so you could have like a a learned
model of like how the image looks and
then like optimize for that.
>> How about this? What if just like
recognizing sharp gradients in color or
something?
>> I think this is like getting to one
pretty practical solution.
>> It's interesting that a problem like
this that is so concisely described can
have so many different plausible
solutions.
>> I think like we're not actually really
looking for the interviewees like get
the canonical solution. It's more about
like discussing all like the ML
possibilities and like the seeing if
like people can like predict like the
failure mode of whatever idea they think
is most promising.
>> Yeah, but what is the solution?
>> It turns out like a surprisingly
effective solution is
>> For the viewers, you can leave your
solutions in the comments. And if this
is the kind of puzzle you enjoy, go to
janestreet.com/fourcast
to check out their open ML positions.
Okay, so just to tie a couple of uh
threads we're talking about together.
The prince is painting a picture of
just regime is incredibly unstable. You
have to worry about foreign powers. You
have to worry about uh rival factions in
your own country. Um you have to worry
about mercenaries. You have to worry
about lots of different things. And so
any given regime is very unstable. And
so what had to happen for
things to get more stable basically. And
we're talking about a couple of the ways
in which
people owed their loyalties not to the
regime but to others within the regime
which created instability. So in
Discourses on Livy, Machiavelli talks
about the Roman Empire. One of the
reasons that its fall was um
instigated is that these generals who
were months away in the frontier
fighting these wars because the empire
was so big.
>> Yeah.
>> had to amass for the periods of years or
in some cases for Caesar of course
decades the command of so many men who
have for decades just basically been
listening to this guy tell them what to
do, who to fight next. This is the
person who they're loyal to. Um
as opposed to say if the consuls could
be giving dictates every single day.
Uh then the loyalty could be to the
regime in Rome. And same with patronage
if there's not a system of
both deterministic justice that we have
>> Mhm.
>> in the modern world today. So a lot of
the prince is dedicated in Discourses on
Livy on well how do you make sure that
some family is not pissed off that their
son got killed and it wasn't avenged or
whatever. And if you just have a
reliable criminal justice system that
problem goes away.
And same with uh the welfare state and
getting rid of the patronage system.
Basically, if you don't have to rely on
this family
then this this intermediates them and
the state can have your loyalty. So it's
interesting to connect all these threads
together of um
communication time, impartial justice
system, impartial welfare state uh
as being what is required for the regime
to have enough legitimacy and then as a
result enough stability to have modern
nation states.
>> Yeah.
You know, one thing that
everyone is surprised by is that when
Valentino Borgia
this is that when Cesare Borgia
Valentino is much more what he's called
in the period. Uh when Cesare Borgia
conquers these cities in Central Italy
and he goes in and he massacres the
ruling family and he works hard to kill
every member of them that he can so that
there isn't uh a potential rival
claimant to come displace him.
And he implements
neutral justice
because he and his cronies have no side
in that city. They aren't connected with
one group of families against another.
And when they implement justice, they do
so neutrally because they aren't
interested in the local backstory of
factions.
And as a result, to everyone's surprise,
he moves into a city, he massacres the
rulers, he implements an authoritarian
regime, and he's incredibly popular and
beloved by the people.
And everyone says, "Why are they liking
this man? He is a cruel murdering
tyrant." And the answer is for the first
time in generations, they have had
something close to fair justice.
Meaning it used to be that there was one
faction in power and there was another
faction out of power, which meant in our
scenario where carpenter's son gets
drunk and kills someone in a broken
brawl, if that carpenter's son is the
carpenter of the power that's in power,
then there will be no justice and there
will be no consequences for this murder,
maybe the smallest of fines. And if that
carpenter works for the families that
are out of power, then throw the book at
him, he'll be executed for that death
and there will be no fair justice. The
outcome of the sentence will be entirely
who's in power and out of power and not
uh the fairness of the case. But when
both of those ruling powers have been
wiped out and an outside power is here
and a homicide takes place, the neutral
judge hears this neutrally and gives the
same answer regardless of whose family's
carpenter that is. And the people who
have lived in generations of there is
justice for some
and injustice for others suddenly having
equitable justice
are delighted by this and find that
wrongs are finally being punished. The
people that they've resented and hated
for so long who were in power are
finally being punished for the crimes
that they commit. And this makes
Valentino's conquering and violent
regime incredibly popular with the
everyday people of these cities who are
therefore willing to sign up for his
armies and help defend
his conquests and keep them in power and
man his fortresses.
So Machiavelli and others are startled
by this. They had expected that if a
conqueror moves in, massacres the rulers
of a city, everyone in the city will
hate and fear that conqueror. But if the
conqueror is feared and not hated
because he wiped them out but then was
fair toward the people,
then it works.
>> So why would it have been so bad if
Valentino took over Florence and he had
survived and
it it he would have massacred maybe the
ruling regime at the time with the
Republic. But Mach- I don't know what
Machiavelli is especially concerned
about, but like the cultural treasures
of Florence and everything.
>> it So again, the discourse is not it's I
think the cultural treasures of Florence
would potentially been okay.
Um there's two answers to that. One of
them is
Machiavelli is very adamant that
if
you live such that there is somebody who
can have you summarily executed. He can
walk by you in the street and point at
you and say, "Him. Kill him." And it
happens. Then you are not free.
Um in his vocabulary in the text, if you
live in a state of where there is an
arbitrary power who can have you put to
death, you are a slave.
Uh and if instead you live in a system
where there must be a trial and there
must be a process and this must be
examined and public, right? If there is
a system, then you have liberty.
That system may be unfair.
It may be biased. It may be, in
Machiavelli's case, the very system that
tortured and exiled him.
But there was a system and he considers
that difference to be enormously
important.
So, if Valentino conquers Florence, it's
not going to be that system anymore.
There will be a man who can walk down
the street and point at a Florentine
citizen and say, "Kill him."
And they will kill him.
And will that tyrant be fair? Maybe.
Will that tyrant exercise this power
well? Perhaps.
Will his successor be worse or better
than him? We don't know. We can't
predict. It's a monarchy. It's
vulnerable to good successors and bad
successors. But the people of Florence
are not free if there exists a man who
can say, "Execute him."
That meant a lot to Machiavelli. And it
meant a lot to the Florentine people and
it's kind of hard for us to
see how few liberties and how little
franchise they had and yet how much they
cared.
Right? Florentines are constantly
willing to go into the street and risk
their lives flying the banner that says
libertas across it, liberty, right? And
the banner libertas is the coat of arms
of the signoria, of the senate. Which is
selected from the 1% super mega elite.
>> [laughter]
>> Tiny minority of the city that is
eligible to be in government. They
aren't rioting to defend their right to
participate in the republic. They're
rioting to defend their bosses bosses
right
to be in the republic. And yet they care
so deeply about it, and they consider it
fundamentally different from the
situation in which there is a man who
can walk down the street and points at
you and say, "Him.
Kill him." Right?
And that tradition of liberty means a
lot and would be gone even if the most
beneficent tyrant in the world took the
city. So, that's half of the answer.
>> Can I ask about that
>> Sure.
>> So, when Lorenzo de Piero de Medici
takes over, is he not that guy?
>> So, that's the second half of the
answer. So,
there is a huge difference between when
the conqueror is from your city, loves
your city, and wants to take care of
your city. And when the conqueror is
from the outside.
Because when the Medici take over
Florence, they want Florence. And they
want Florence to be Florence. And they
want all of its beauty and all of its
treasures to still exist and be theirs.
They would never consider raising
important parts of it to the ground.
They would never consider threatening
the Florentines with, "We will destroy
your city walls, or we will destroy your
cathedral if you rebel."
Any outsider would.
>> Yeah.
>> So, Florence looks more like Florence
under a Medici Duke than Milan looks
like Republican Milan under a Visconti
or Sforza Duke uh than Ferrara, which
has no remnants of its republic, does
under the Dukes d'Este, who can do
anything they want, including
murderously gouging each other's eyes
out. And the city will never uh take one
step against them. So, Machiavelli is
aware that Florence, if it has to fall,
falling to the Medici is gentlest.
Uh most volatile, perhaps.
Uh because they aren't going to be
feared as much as an outside conqueror
would be feared. But certainly gentlest
in that you preserve some important
rights
when you're conquered from inside that
you don't when you're conquered from
inside.
>> Mhm.
So,
obviously we remember this period
producing all these great cultural
artifacts, all these amazing buildings,
all this art.
>> Yeah.
>> And then we're talking about the
precariousness of the prince, the
constant wars, how they're literally
fighting all the time. How is there this
surplus that is available for all these
different projects? You write in your
book about how the older Lorenzo de
Medici spends what would be today,
because of the expense of um
you know, building libraries and buying
books, what would be today $30 million
to build a library to educate his
grandsons. So, how is there all this
surplus available for education and arts
and so forth in a period where
everybody's fighting everybody and if
you lose a war, your city will get, if
not raised, at least the ruling faction
will get killed.
>> So, half of that answer is finance is
incredibly profitable.
>> Mhm.
>> And if you're the banking center, the
amount of money that is flowing in is
staggering.
Uh
big wool, the big industry uh for
Florence, is also incredibly incredibly
wealthy. So, in the same way that Harold
Ford becomes incredibly rich in a period
when a suit of clothing is something you
save up for like buying a car, and
everybody needs one.
Uh you can get very rich that way. So,
A, there's lots of money. But B,
do you remember how it's often said that
the
biggest impact per dollar for US defense
spending is the Fulbright program?
>> Mhm.
>> Because diplomacy is cheaper than war
and sending a you know bright-eyed
bushy-tailed young graduate student out
to a country to enthuse about its
culture and make connections and make
everyone feel positively does a lot more
to avoid conflict and also get help in
conflict than the same amount of
spending on the actual army does, right?
And that dollar for dollar diplomacy is
cheaper than war. They're using the art
to do diplomacy and so in one sense if
you're not doing the art you would have
to spend more on the war. It's not that
the art is being made from a surplus of
the war. It's oh no, we can't afford
enough armies to actually defend us
against France even if we spent every
penny we have on armies. It would not
defend us against France.
But we sure can spend it on painting
fleur-de-lis all over our seat of
government and creating beautiful
expensive gifts for the king of France
so that when the king of France comes he
will feel like we are friends and we are
giving him all of this cultural output.
And if we fought him we would lose. But
if we play the culture victory game
that's cheaper.
>> Yeah.
>> And we can try to win.
>> We talked about this last time the
experience of what it must have been
like for a French diplomatic arrive at
Florence and look at these people he
considered to be
I don't know know nothing nothings were
not even descended from the Caesars and
so forth and they're producing all this
stuff. When
um when when when one goes to visit
Florence now
the interest is in part because these
are historical artifacts, right? Because
somebody made them 500 years ago. But if
you're seeing them at the time this
would be something either you thought
only the Romans could have done that we
can't do anymore or something that even
the Romans couldn't have done.
>> Right. I mean they're they're high-tech
then. They're like when we look at a
incredibly impressive skyscraper that's
taller and more precarious and amazing
than the past skyscraper.
>> I think that is a sort of underrated
aspect of what it must have been like to
Yeah, be a foreign power evaluating
Florence at the time.
>> Yeah, yeah, it's it's it's we have to
remind ourselves that these are
high-tech achievements as well as
historic
achievements. And also that this is a
period in which backwards is forwards,
which is to say this is not a period
that like us thinks of the future as
where potential is and humanity might
get better and better over time. The
potential of humanity is recapturing
Rome.
>> Right.
>> Uh backwards is forwards. If we can get
more and more like that,
that'll be better. That's what we aspire
to. And they do debate, can we surpass
the Romans? Can we make things even
better than the Romans? But it's an if,
it's a debate. It's not a definitely, of
course. For us it's a definitely, of
course. We're moving forward. We're
trying to build bigger and more
impressive things. Even for people who
are cynical about progress, people will
say, "Yeah, we will be more powerful in
the future. We'll be able to do more. We
may use it to stab ourself in the foot,
but we will be more powerful in future."
And for them it's very much, "Will we
ever be as powerful as the Romans?"
Uh we don't know. We can debate it. We
hope so. We aspire to it. Will there be
another Pax Romana? Will there be
another universal peace someday? Will we
ever achieve that again?
So,
when we look at something that is like
Florence's cathedral or Florence's
neoclassical buildings,
you know, we look at it and we know
they're imitating the past. And so we
don't think of it as cutting-edge
technology. But for them cutting-edge
technology is imitating the past.
>> Yeah.
We talked about last time how
both Machiavelli and the other humanists
in the different ways they understood
virtue were trying to emulate the
virtues that made Rome originally great.
Um
how much are they going off of just
these random myths that Livy or whoever
write down about something that
supposedly happened where Brutus killed
his own sons or who was that guy who put
his hand in the fire to show that the
Roman people will be loyal and you
should fight us.
>> Um and how much is it, you know, you
look at actual Roman history
and it's like incredibly up,
right? We're just talking before we
started recording about the life of
Claudius and
um and the the period of the emperors
and so forth and but surely this must
have been known to them that actually
>> I mean, part of it is they're zooming in
on different emperors. And when we want
to make an HBO drama, we don't make it
about the kind of boring competent
emperors who just do a really good job.
Uh our society might be better off if we
did.
>> Yeah.
>> Right? But, you know, the dramatic uh
emperors where there's lots of stabbing
and lots of orgies make for good
television.
>> But, everybody curates our history. And
often when you're writing the history of
your own culture, you pick the heroes,
right? And no matter, you know, you look
at a middle school history textbook,
it's going to celebrate the heroes of
that country.
And if it's trying hard to be unbiased,
it will also acknowledge the faults, but
the heroes are going to be in there. Uh
when they are trying to create a
handbook of what was,
what stands out for them is what's
different from their present. Their
present has plenty of tyrants. Their
present has plenty of orgies. Their
present has plenty of massacres. Their
present does not have
>> Mhm.
>> 70 years of peace.
So, that's what stands out as different.
>> Right.
>> Um and I think for us some of the orgies
and massacres stand out more because we
don't have as many orgies and massacres
now. Or at least not publicly that we
know about.
Um and when we do expose that our
leaders have been involved in uh
scandalous orgies, we get very upset
about it. Um but, you know, to them,
they read about all of this and they
read about the successes and they read
about the stability from Trajan,
Hadrian, Marcus Aurelius and May.
Uh they say that is alien to us. That we
haven't had in so long. That is what we
want to have again.
>> So much so that when Gibbon is writing
the
the history of the fall and decline of
the Roman Empire in multiple volumes,
but in the late 18th century
in the late 18th century, he says that
there's never been a better time for
humanity
than during the great the
>> the Pax Romana.
>> the and the five good emperors.
>> Yeah. Well, and and to the degree that
medieval Europe can't cope with the idea
that these good emperors were also
pagans and were therefore in hell,
right? And which is where you get this
gorgeous legend that Pope Gregory the
Great
summoned the ghost of Trajan and
baptized his ghost so that he can go to
heaven.
>> Mhm.
>> Even though Trajan is a, you know,
during the persecution of the Christians
emperor, but they just love him so much
they can't handle the idea that he would
be in hell despite being a great Caesar.
So, the medieval world, it is canon
>> Yeah.
>> that emperor Trajan was posthumously
>> Huh.
>> uh baptized so that he could go to
heaven because he's such a good emperor.
And Dante see centers him in Paradiso as
the ideal
Christian ruler. And you're like, but he
wasn't Christian. He was persecuting the
Christians. But this is medieval and
Renaissance Europe are very good at
having their cake and eating it, too, in
terms of getting to pick and choose the
best parts of the pagan world and the
best part of the Christian world when
constructing their imagined antiquity to
have both of and celebrate both at once.
>> Actually, so
here's something I'm confused about.
Machiavelli makes a point of pointing
out Cesare Borgia's betrayals because of
how remarkable they are.
Um for example,
>> Remiro de Orco.
>> Yeah, so slaying the very deputy that he
had tasked with being harsh and as a
result bringing peace to a region for
that harshness that he had delegated or,
you know, inviting as
a gesture of goodwill some people who
are going to do a revolution against him
and then killing them all at the
banquet. Um
But should we take the fact that he's
making a special point that hey, if
actually take this kind of betrayal or
this is kind of deed as something you
should consider doing
as evidence that this is actually rare
at the time? Um
Maybe another way to ask the question is
to the extent that they are all
Christians at the time, surely
they really did believe they're going to
go to hell if they betray people or if
they lie or break their oaths or
something, right? So just as you were
saying a second ago about how capital
punishment was actually less prominent
at the time than we we in retrospect
think it to be, are these kinds of crazy
political intrigues or whatever less
common than these stories make it out to
be?
>> two two halves to that answer and I'll
do the second one first. The second one
being about the religious one, right?
Cuz they all believe in this religion
that says if you do this, you're going
to go to hell and then they all do this.
Yeah. And that's
something that this period really
wrestles with.
And everybody is sinning and breaking
their rules all the time.
And you know, killing for honor and uh
committing uh usury, right? Lending
money at interest. They're all sinning
all the time and they're all doing these
things that are against the rules all
the time.
And
people in the period do bring that up
and say, "Hey, this is not okay." And
this is one of the big focuses of
Dante's Commedia.
Uh and Dante in it says, "Look, when you
do these things, you will go to hell for
them." And he fills his hell with
Florentines. Right? And there's that
wonderful line where he meets yet
another group of Florentines and he
says, "Congratulations, Florence, a city
famous in hell." Because he considers
his Florentine peers to be particularly
hypocritical. Uh and as he goes through,
we see Florentines
uh especially in the sections for usury
and for sodomy, uh but also, you know,
heretics and unbelievers and all through
he's encountering his countrymen,
including people he himself loves and
respects.
Because Dante is making this painful
point of, "Guys, it says that if we do
this, we go to hell.
I got to make a book where that's
literally true."
And one of the chapters of Inferno that
hits extra hard in his period and in
ours is is
Canto III where he's encountering the
lustful and we see Paolo and Francesca.
Paolo and Francesca, this is a story
that was incredibly popular love story
at the time.
There was a young, beautiful noblewoman
who had a, you know, older, horrible
husband and while he was away, there was
also this wonderful, handsome young
nobleman who visited him and her and
they read the romantic stories about
King Arthur and Guinevere and Lancelot
and one thing led to another and they
committed adultery together and then her
husband came home and found them and
murdered them both.
And everyone loves this story. It is the
ubiquitous love story. It's their
cultural equivalent to Romeo and Juliet,
right? And it's a touchstone story.
People sing songs about it. Everyone
knows this exciting love tragedy. And he
puts them in hell because they were
guilty of adultery. And it's really
shocking to everyone who has celebrated
this love story and then like, "No, if
this is true and this is our religion
that this is where they would be."
And Dante is very stern and very strict
and very unusual and starts a lot of
discussion of this question of we're
breaking these rules all the time.
Should we just take this more seriously
than we have?" And he says, "Repent or
you will all go to hell, my fellow
citizens." So, they're worried about
that. But, another part of it is
Christianity as practiced then has a
much, much less focus on purity
than the Christianity that especially
America is used to and also the
Protestant-dominated parts of Europe.
And there is a big change in
Christianity that comes in the course of
the Reformation, primarily from Calvin,
Calvinism, and then Puritanism, which
has a greater focus on trying to live an
unspotted and pure life.
Uh and the idea of, you know, we're
going to create a community of people
who are all going to stick to the rules
and live by them. And if you are a
sinner and have broken these rules, you
should be expelled from this community.
This is going You are impure. You are
stained.
Um that is not the way Christianity
thinks in this period. The assumption is
everybody sins all the time. There is no
such thing as purity. Everybody sins
every 5 minutes. Uh everybody is
envious. Everybody is lustful. Everybody
is slothful. Everybody will make these
mistakes, and then you repent of them,
and you feel sorry, and you do penance,
and you make spiritual progress, and you
are forgiven, and then you sin again.
Everybody sins. St. Francis of Assisi
sins. He was a big focus on his himself
as a sinner,
uh and was constantly self-flagellating
despite being in many ways the most
virtuous man in all of Europe, but
stressing his own sin.
So, one saint who's super popular in the
Renaissance, who is not very popular
today, is St. Julian the Hospitaller,
patron saint of murderers.
And he is the patron saint of murderers
uh because his legend is a sort of an
Oedipus-like legend that when he was
born, he was cursed by a witch that when
he grew up, he would slay his parents.
And he runs far away hoping that he will
never encounter his parents and so not
meet them, but uh eventually feels
homesick and comes home, and uh
um
uh
is tricked by the devil into
slaughtering his parents, and he
slaughters his parents, and then he
spends the rest of his life trying to
make up for it, and going on pilgrimage,
and then dedicating his life to running
pilgrim hostels to help others be
pilgrims. And he is the patron saint for
people who have committed murder and
feel really sorry and need to live with
it and repent of it.
And that's not the attitude we have
toward murderers right now, right? Our
cultural attitude toward murderers is
that person is a murderer, they should
be shunned. They should be locked in a
box without the key or they should be
executed, they should be removed from
the society. There is no turning back
from homicide.
But the Renaissance's idea is sometimes
you got to commit a homicide, and then
what's important is that you feel sorry,
and you need to have a patron saint
whose job it is to be a spiritual mentor
for you. He who too committed homicide,
he committed a worse homicide than you
did cuz he killed his parents, and if he
went on a spiritual journey to recover
from being a murderer, so can you. And
there are dozens and dozens and dozens
of icons of St. Julian all over
uh Renaissance Florence. Everywhere you
go in and you see one you're like,
"Mhm." Uh that was commissioned by
somebody who committed a homicide and is
trying to live with it. Um this is a
society that really thinks about sin as
something you do, and then you pay for
it afterward. And people like Dante and
Savonarola kind of people saying, "No,
this is not okay. You are perverting
these things. No, you cannot put your
family's coat of arms all over the
inside of a church turning the church
into an advertisement for your banking
business when it should be a place of
God. That's inappropriate and and no,
God will not forgive you for it." And
the society says, "Yeah, well,
but God forgives maybe anything if we
repent a lot, right?" And so it's a
complicated, sophisticated hypocrisy
>> Mhm.
>> that builds up a lot of apparatus to let
the society's
actions be at odds with its religious
precepts to that degree.
>> We're going to need dozens and
eventually hundreds of gigawatts of new
AI data centers. The only way to achieve
this at scale is to turn the data center
build-out into an industrial process.
Basically, manufacturing modular
components that you can literally slide
into position wherever there's power.
Crusoe is furthest along at making this
[music] happen. Crusoe has a 350,000
square foot factory in Colorado where
they assemble their spark units. These
modular AI data centers with everything
already [music] pre-built. High density
racks, power, cooling, fire suppression,
you name it. Crusoe actually
manufactures a lot of these components
in-house. This allows them to sidestep
long lead times on components like
switchgear and power distribution
centers. All of this, of course, would
be moot if Crusoe still had to wait
years to connect each module to the
grid, but they don't. Crusoe has a ton
of experience connecting their data
[music] centers to alternative energy
sources. For example, Crusoe has a site
in Nevada powered by rugged materials
that runs completely [music] on solar
and used EV batteries. They're actually
in the process of expanding it, adding
in a couple dozen more spark units from
their Colorado facility. So, if you want
AI capacity that's not fully dependent
on grid availability or strained supply
chains, you [music] should reach out to
Crusoe. Go to crusoe.ai/dorcas
to learn more.
Okay, I couldn't get enough of Adao or
of Machiavelli, and so there are a few
more questions I wanted to ask you.
Thanks for hopping on again.
>> Oh, my treat.
>> We didn't talk last time, I think, about
the fact that Machiavelli was exiled and
he's writing these books in exile. Maybe
you can give a bit of context around how
somebody we were talking about his
diplomatic career, how he ends up in
exile, and what his plan is once he's
there.
>> Yeah, and and I mean, here we have to
start with everybody who's anybody in
the intellectual tradition lives in
exile for a while, right? Dante does,
Voltaire does, Rousseau does, Thomas
Hobbes does, Machiavelli does. And more
importantly, exile was a very common
thing in Florence.
And isn't the permanence that one
expects in Florence? Exile means the
people who are in charge of the regime
distrust you right now, they want you
out of the city, but they are testing
your loyalty. They are testing whether
you will stay true to them. And you're
told not get out of the city like a
Roman exile, but go to a specific place.
Go to London. Go to Bruges. Go here,
stay there, and we will send you
instructions. And then you're expected
to act as a kind of unofficial official
emissary for the government of Florence
while in your exile. And you'll be asked
to do diplomatic missions after a while.
They'll say, you know, go talk to this
person on our behalf or go deliver this
trusted letter. And if you're good and
you behave,
then after some years of service to the
Republic, you'll be recalled. So, it's a
sort of a provisional exile.
And they pick a specific place to send
you. And if you go and are good and do
what they say, then after a while they
consider bringing you home. If you
don't, if you leave and you don't stay
where they said, if you run off to work
for someone else, then, okay, you're not
allowed back in Florence anymore. You're
you're an exile at this point.
Machiavelli's exile
is unusual because they really don't
trust him. And so, they don't send him
to Bruges or London or Barcelona or the
Germanys or any number of other places
where he actually has political contacts
or doesn't. They send him to a middle of
nowhere Hamlet
in the countryside outside of Florence
in Tuscany, where there is nobody
important and there is nothing to do.
And this isn't a go wait for
instructions. This is a go write.
And we're testing whether you will
faithfully stay and do basically nothing
and be forbidden to talk to important
people, be in isolation.
When that exile is given, everybody
expects that Machiavelli's response will
be, "Okay, they're not giving me even a
second chance. I'm going to run off and
work for somebody else." Because there
are a jillion people in Europe who would
love to employ a skillful
classicist historian with military and
diplomatic capacities who has political
contacts in Rome and in France and has
visited the court of the emperor. He
could have worked for any number of
cardinals. He could have gotten a very
prestigious diplomatic job in any of a
number of a dozen courts.
A Florentine historian especially is
something that you absolutely want to
hire to write a history a flattering
history of your own family. And for even
a century before this kings as far away
as as England had been trying to hire
Florentine historians to come write
about them. So he could easily do this
and this is what is expected and he
doesn't.
Because Machiavelli says no, I'm going
to stay and I'm going to rot. And I'm
going to write The Prince which is my
job application begging the new regime
to bring me back and let me work for
them and demonstrating my loyalty and
I'm going to send it to them and only
them them and my immediate friends. I'm
not going to share it with anybody else.
Because Machiavelli is a patriot and he
will not serve any cause that is not his
country.
Um
no matter whether the pay at a royal
court somewhere would be three times
what he would ever get at home. That
doesn't matter to him.
No matter whether this is the regime
that just arrested tortured and exiled
him despite him not having plotted
against him. He wants to work for that
because Machiavelli fundamentally is
possibly one of the most patriotic
patriots in Earth's history.
And he will faithfully sit in the
countryside and rot while begging to
work for the people who ordered his
torture.
So long as they will recall him so that
he can serve his country.
And this connects to the question we
always ask about the target audience of
The Prince. Because his other work his
discourses his histories his comedic
play those were for public circulation.
Those increased his fame. Those made
important arguments. His history of
Florence joined other important
histories of Florence circulating
influencing the way people thought about
politics. Not The Prince.
The Prince is secret proprietary
the secret sauce and how to maintain
power.
And he will not let any other power have
that. Right? It's like a nuclear
scientist with diplomatic secrets who is
faithful to his country and will not
sell out and let those secrets fall into
other hands. Machiavelli knows that he
has the beginnings of a new world of
political science.
And he will only share that with the
government of his country because he
wants it to protect his country and he
will not serve any other cause.
This is why it's so
weirdly ironic to me that the
reputation, the word Machiavellian,
right, means self-serving.
When Machiavelli himself is one of the
most selfless men I've ever read about
in the history of the earth. Uh who will
give up and sacrifice career, diplomacy,
fame, friends, uh the opportunity to
even be in a city and have a nice day
uh to rot in the countryside to be
faithful to his country. And he would
rather serve nothing and no one
than give an hour of his time to
advancing anything that is not Florence.
>> You're making the point that he is
advocating uh viciousness and a realism
and a cynicism but in service of
protecting Florence, not in service of a
generic prince of any generic
principality.
>> Exactly. And he doesn't let it copies of
it circulate to anybody but the rulers
of Florence and his immediate scholarly
social intimate circle of friends,
right? People that he's known for
decades who are scholar peers who have
discussed his ideas with them. That's
the audience of The Prince uh during his
lifetime.
>> Do Do you Does he expect that at some
point it will be more widely
distributed? Is he writing in a way that
suggests that I mean if you it is a
literary masterpiece as well. I don't I
mean I've only read obviously the
translations so I don't know what's what
it's like in
the original Italian but
somebody putting in that much literary
effort into something that is just
supposed to be uh very pragmatic manual
for a particular person seems a bit
weird.
>> Well, we have to remember this is a
moment of transition
from the manuscript to the print period
and also therefore an important moment
of transition from
what makes a written work important and
how that written work is important to
the career of someone who's written it.
So,
it's a normal thing in Machiavelli's
youth
for a major important scholar like say
Pontano, one of the greatest scholars of
the previous generation, to be hired to
write a handbook of princes that will
exist in just one copy or three or four
copies that are written for a specific
prince. Right, so for example, King
Alfonso of Naples, the Spanish king who
conquered Naples, Alfonso the
Magnanimous, uh made famous for his vast
patronage of arts and letters and for
carefully culti- vated personal
anecdotes like the moment that he was in
the middle of fighting a war and a
messenger rushed in to his room sweaty
and covered with things to interrupt the
king's morning uh time with his scholar
friends discussing Plato and the king
turned angrily on the messenger and
said, "Get out. This is a place for men
in togas, not for men in armor." and
refused to listen to the urgent message
until he'd finish his hour of scholarly
contemplation of the soul. Um as a
result of which he lost that battle,
uh but actually won the war.
And his reputation cultivated by
anecdotes like that make him beloved,
right? He will pay a salary five times
what the Republic Florence will pay to
hire somebody like Machiavelli. And what
does he hire them to do? He has a lot of
children, princes and princesses, and he
commissions a scholar to write a unique
bespoke handbook of how to rule and use
power for each of his children.
And these exist in manuscript only in
one copy or three copies and the
addressee is the Duchess of Ferrara who
is a daughter of King Alfonso. Uh and
that book is never intended to
circulate. It's intended to be private
guidance for her and for her to perhaps
pass on to her sons and daughters. But
meanwhile, the author's fame is
magnified by being told the special
bespoke handbook of princes cultivated
secretly for this important princess was
written by so-and-so. That's so cool.
And letters circulating let you know
that it's happening. So in the same way
that a scientist might become famous
because we know he's developing cool
proprietary technology that only his
government has, but we know that it's
happening. We have to think of these
books as proprietary technology.
>> Huh.
>> And in that sense that it's not an
unusual thing to write a book with a
audience of one.
Or an audience of one and her immediate
circle. And this is also one of the
moments where handbook of prince also
means for women, right? So the title of
that book for the princess who becomes
Duchess for for of Ferrara addresses her
as a prince. Uh and it's a handbook of
princes because prince is a gender
neutral word at this point. It's, you
know, lexically masculine in terms of
masculine and ending and feminine
endings on the word the same way a table
is feminine. Uh but prince is used for
men and women. Um and even Queen
Elizabeth is Prince Elizabeth at this
period of her of her of her life.
>> That is so fascinating.
>> Because we have trouble wrapping our
heads around the idea of writing a book
for an audience of one. It's just not
what a book is to us.
>> Well, that that the funny thing is I
think we're returning we're not return
we are entering a new era. Well, that
might be once again possible. It already
is somewhat true where I think most of
the at least half of the words I read on
a given day are generated specifically
for me and nobody else um because of AI.
And obviously AI is
not capable of writing something which I
think would be a literary masterpiece
that everybody would want to read if
they had access to it just yet, but
eventually it will be. And so it's
interesting to consider that as this
technology progresses, it would bring us
back to this era of bespoke scholars
dedicated to a particular prince.
>> It's It's sort of important to remember
that that never went away. I mean, so
two two halves of that. One, for ages
it's been true that half of the words we
read every day are bespoke only for us
because they're email.
>> Yeah.
>> Right? They're letters. They're the the
correspondence back and forth, which has
the audience of one, the addressee, and
that's the majority of what all of us
read and write in our lives.
It's also always been the case that in
the halls of power, there are book-long
things with an audience of one or an
audience of five. Right? There are
historians and other scholars and
scientists whose job is to provide that
100-page report on here is the history
of Syria to be given to a committee of
Congress where these nine senators or
these nine congresspeople need the
background on what's happening so that
they can understand a current events
thing, right? And there are historian
friends of mine who work for the
Department of Defense Intelligence who
produce these book-length research
projects with an audience of five or an
audience of eight or an audience of a
couple dozen because it is the bespoke
proprietary knowledge needed by
government in that moment. And sometimes
it's technological knowledge, but just
as often it's going to be historical
knowledge of here are the important
rivers where military things are likely
to happen, says historian who knows the
history of this stuff.
>> Yeah. And that actually brings up the
question of how many such tracks through
history which are of the quality of The
Prince are as original at their time as
The Prince is and as wonderfully crafted
and so on that have been lost to
history? And maybe one way to answer
this question or think about it is to
talk about how The Prince itself went
into mass publishing. So at some point
in 1532, the Medici Pope allows for its
publishing, and then 27 years later,
then it is censored by that same papacy.
Um
And so how how does this book that
Machiavelli himself did not want out in
wide circulation end up in wide
circulation and then stop ending up in
wide circulation and then end up in wide
circulation again?
>> Yeah. And and it goes in and out and in
and out like like a lot of important
works. So, I'll be I'll give the zoomed
out and then the zoomed in answer to
that question. It is often the case that
a work which contains radically unusual
ideas will drift along being not
particularly
zoomed in on by society and not widely
read until it hits a moment that the new
questions being asked in that century or
that decade are answered by something in
that text. And then suddenly everyone
will start reading it. Uh, a different
example of this probably well known to
the audience cuz everyone here is, uh,
cool, smart, learned person. Uh,
Lucretius' On the Nature of Things, De
Rerum Natura, which is our best capsule
of ancient atomism and the atoms and
vacuum theory of matter, right? Which is
written in around the BC/AD turn and
drifts along being not very important
for ages until the 1600s when we're
getting the first ideas of germ theory
of disease, very interested in new
science, and suddenly it gets 30 print
editions and then is all over the place
and influences science and is even more
influential than in the 19th century
when we're interested in atoms and
cells, right? Uh, and so, a book can
exist for literally 2,000 years or close
to and then boop, suddenly answer the
questions of that decade.
>> Mhm.
>> Right. So, in that sense, The Prince
will drift along and be not very
important for a while. And you know, why
is it first published? It's first
published when Machiavelli's still
surviving relatives want fame for the
family and fame for their beloved now
dead kinsman. Here is a work of his that
hasn't been published yet. They ask for
permission because this can spread his
fame. It's also dedicated to members of
the Medici family, so the Medici are
like, yeah, we get fame for publishing
this thing, too." They don't think as
seriously about the power of its
contents as its author did.
Uh and so, it's one more book that can
spread the fame both of the Machiavelli
family and of the Medici family. And it
is around and people are like, "Oh,
that's actually full of fairly
scandalous ideas. Hmm." Which is how it
then ends up on the index as book
censorship kicks up as a result of the
printing press. And you know, mini
thesis, every time there's a new
information technology, there's a
subsequent wave of censorship to try to
censor the new technology and a
bajillion books get banned all at once.
Uh Machiavelli's is not a particularly
prominent uh example among this, right?
The index of banned books that's uh that
contains this work that's put out
carefully differentiates between the
dangerous books by arch heretics and the
like slightly dangerous books by meh
people. And arch heretics are in all
caps. Hmm.
I remember when I was first reading
through one of these indexes, I was so
excited to flip through and find
Machiavelli and there he was, not in all
caps. And I was so angry.
It's like, "What's wrong with that?
He should be in all caps." But all the
all caps people are Luther, Calvin,
Zwingli, a bajillion Protestant
theologians you've never heard of. All
caps arch heretic status is reserved for
Protestantism in this period.
Uh Machiavelli doesn't doesn't catch on
until later. So, he's censored in a wave
of censoring like everything when
there's a big censorious wave and then
it diminishes and goes up and down.
The second zoomed-in half of that, if we
say Lucretius becomes exciting when
people want to know about the germ
theory of disease, when does Machiavelli
become exciting? Machiavelli becomes
exciting first
in the aftermath of the publication of
Hobbes's Leviathan.
>> Hmm.
>> Uh because Hobbes's Leviathan hits
European thought like a truck full of
bricks
and has this incredibly
persuasive, gorgeous reasoning
that lands you on a terrifying vision of
what humanity is and a terrifying vision
of what God is that people find very
scary but also incredibly persuasive.
And it's no exaggeration to say that in
the aftermath of publishing Leviathan,
there's a 40-year period where the sole
goal of Western European philosophy is
coming up with a good way to refute
Hobbes. And in that moment, they say,
"Okay, Hobbes is using a lot of logics
about politics and about history that
sound like Machiavelli. He's doing these
utilitarian consequentialist analysis of
if we do this, there's that result. He's
analyzing the origins of government as
if there's no divinity setting it up,
right? He has this man in a state of
nature invents government instead of God
from on high tells Adam, here is how you
should organize the world."
And so they say, "Okay,
you know, Hobbes is the monster. Hobbes
is Leviathan the Great or the Beast of
Malmesbury as as newspapers call him
during his lifetime. How do we refute
refute the monster? Let's look at the
daddy monster that spawned the baby
monster. If we can read Machiavelli and
find holes in Machiavelli, maybe we can
use those to refute Hobbes." And so
Machiavelli is suddenly useful not to
people who sympathize with him but to
people who see him as an enemy. But once
they use him to try to defeat what to
them is the greater enemy. So he surges
in popularity at that point. Um and then
a different surge happens actually in
the 19th century and it's not until the
19th century that Machiavelli's Prince
becomes a major global staple that you
would put in a great books series. And
in the 19th century, in the aftermath of
the Enlightenment and the
Enlightenment's revolutions, right? So
the American Republic, the French
Republic, the transformations and
democratic movements that are happening
in lots of other governments, people
want new ways to think about politics
and they want to think about politics in
separation of church and state. And if
you want to think about separation of
church and state, which is a new
Enlightenment era value, what do you
need? You need an apparatus for thinking
about politics and ethics that doesn't
depend on God being part of it. And the
vast majority of political treatises
available to humanity at that point have
some sort of entanglement of religion
with politics at their root, but
Machiavelli doesn't. Machiavelli is this
early foundational what if we think
about government in in a box without
plugging into religion. Uh what if we
just think about government operating by
itself and its earthly consequences is
incredibly useful in the 19th century
for developing a statecraft for
separation of church and state.
It's also useful for then Italian
nationalism to celebrate and claim,
"Hey, we invented separation of church
and state. Here's Machiavelli, the first
modern man. He's our bid at
uh it's Italian culture invented
modernity via Machiavelli." At the same
time that England is saying, "Francis
Bacon is the first modern man cuz he
invented the scientific method." At the
same time that France is saying, "Rene
Descartes is the first modern man
because he invented uh logical reasoning
and and modern principles of logical
deduction." Uh there's a competition in
the 19th century, a nationalist one, of
different threat different countries
that want to claim their cool thinker is
the first modern man. And and
Machiavelli becomes one of Italy's big
bids for first modern man because he
came up with separation of church and
state, a phrase that Machiavelli would
not have recognized if you said it to
him, but would have thought about for a
long time, decided was cool, and then
written letters about.
>> Can I can I try out a counter thesis
just so you can uh dispel my confusion?
>> Definitely.
>> One reason why Machiavelli might have
gained a special significance in the
19th century is that now that you have
these republics in the world, uh there's
a question of how you make sure that
they are maintained. And that is really
the question that at least the first
third of the Discourses is obsessed
with. But one of the ways in which says
that you do this is by having a religion
that people take very uh people take
into very strong consideration. I think
he says at some point early in the
discourse is that um the more
significant than Romulus in the founding
of Rome was Numa or whoever it was that
gave the the Roman gods and the Roman
religion some legitimacy. And then it is
this legitimacy and the fear
of offending virtues or whatever because
you believe in some god that will punish
you that motivates people to act in a
way that defends the republic. He gives
the example of Scipio after the battle
in which Hannibal absolutely destroys
the
the Roman armies and the people are
about to flee Rome as a result cuz they
think the Hannibal's coming and Scipio
himself with his sword goes down and
says, "Swear to our gods that you will
stay and defend our homeland." And just
having them give the oath in that moment
is enough to convince them, "Well, I bet
it's Hannibal can't be worse than the
gods so I have to stay here and defend
our republic."
>> Yeah.
>> It seems like he thinks the the religion
is super important to the legitimacy of
the state.
>> Agreed. And he's thinking about it in a
way parallel to the way late 19th
century and 19th century figures are
also thinking about it because we have
to separate institution
of religion from psychological effect of
religion on the populace.
The useful exemplar here is Thomas
Paine, right? We all know Thomas Paine's
Common Sense. Thomas Paine who does a
lot of thinking that about the
foundation of the institutions of the
US. And Thomas Paine is a deist
and a radical and he has lots of
treatises about how the most destructive
force in the world is institutional
religion. And whether it's Catholicism
or the Church of England, these
institutions are giant centuries old or
millennia old conspiracies to control
your mind and steal your money and are
incredibly pernicious to everything.
However, he says,
"Religion is vital to citizenship
because it is what makes people be good
and is what makes people fear laws and
want to obey the laws." So, says Thomas
Paine, every country must have religion
and religious education must be
mandatory in schools, but it doesn't
matter which religion.
Uh Thomas Paine advocated mandatory
religion in total indifference to what
religion it is,
with the idea that fearing God and
postumus punishment is necessary to make
a citizen in a practical sense willing
to obey law. Notice how that is Paine
thinking in a utilitarian way about the
psychological effects of religion being
there.
Which is very different from the older
the state and a state religion are
entangled with each other in the state
promotes this state religion because it
believes it to be true, and we're going
to have a, you know, Christian
nationalist or Catholic nationalist or
uh
Roman paganism nationalist, right,
religion that advances acts against
others.
So, Machiavelli is absolutely thinking
about the psychological effects of a
religion on the people, and he has that
wonderful analysis in the discourse of
the utility of Roman religion. He talks
uh in one really
striking and memorable passage about how
um because Roman religion says that your
ghost depends on being remembered,
right? This is out of the Homeric
tradition. Your ghost only retains its
identity to the degree you're still
remembered on Earth. If on Earth your
name is forgotten, your ghost forgets
its name. This is not a your ghost is
okay forever like in Christianity. It is
a your ghost depends on being honored by
your descendants on Earth. When you are
forgotten, your soul becomes an empty,
mindless, wandering shade. Therefore,
you have an incredibly strong incentive
to
be remembered by doing great deeds,
especially sacrificing yourself for your
country, because then your name will be
honored for as long as your country
lasts. And Machiavelli says this is one
of the big motivators that makes people
sacrifice themselves for the state in
ancient Rome because then they're
guaranteeing their good afterlife. Well,
Christianity, he points out, says all
that matters for good afterlife is being
pious and then ideally like dying being
being martyred.
You have no incentive to sacrifice
yourself for your state. The safety of
your afterlife is guaranteed by your
interiority. This is going to encourage
a citizen to sit in a box and be a monk,
not to sign up for the military and
defend his country. So says Machiavelli,
Roman religion was much better for
patriotism and political stability than
Christianity. But, he says at the end of
the chapter, Christianity has the
advantage of being true, period, end of
chapter.
>> [laughter]
>> Then you say, "Hello Machiavelli, we
know that you had be mandatory
mandatory subscript there. But so think
about Thomas Paine and Machiavelli in
parallel there. They're thinking about
the utility of religion for forming a
citizen.
But they're not thinking about, you
know, this religion is true. We are
doing God's work. We need to craft our
state to match the values of our
religion, which is what a theocrat would
argue.
So you you have a separation of church
and state with the expectation that
religiosity will be there. It will
affect the people. It will affect the
citizenry and their behavior. You need
to think about it. You need to decide
whether to cultivate it, but you need to
think about it in the same neutral way
you think about cultivating literary
literacy skills or math skills in your
citizenry. What skills do we want our
citizenry to have for them to be
well-informed citizens? What do we need?
We need religion and we need good
newspapers so that people are up on the
news and can vote prudently. You are
evaluating those things side by side
from a utilitarian standpoint.
Instead of this religion is true, it is
the obligation of our government to
advance it and our government expects to
receive divine blessings if we advance
the correct religion and divine curses
if we don't.
>> Right.
>> Radically different way of thinking
about religion while still recognizing
it as a powerful factor affecting the
psychology of the populace.
>> That makes sense. So, last episode we
were talking about the psychological
impact on scholarship of having
books be so expensive and having then to
meditate on the same copies that are
available in one library. And maybe
Machiavelli is maybe the strongest
example of this where
maybe through his life we're seeing the
impact of the printing press diffusing
and making printing cheaper, but early
on in his life it's still um not been
that long since the of Gutenberg came up
with the first printing press.
And as a result, he has uh tell me
correct the story for me, but his dad
has to do like months of drudge work
indexing Livy in order to get a copy of
Livy.
>> Yeah, and and and Machiavelli himself,
in order to get books when you know, in
the infancy of printing, books are
scarce and few. So, for example,
one of my favorite manuscripts ever that
I've worked with is a copy of De rerum
natura uh that in Machiavelli's hand, he
copied out the entire poem. Uh this is
in the Vatican Library. But, what's
really neat is he copied the text from a
printed copy.
But, as he copied it, integrated into it
corrections and improvements of errors
in that one, taken from a manuscript
copy, so that what he produced was
better than either the printed version
or the manuscript version.
And then he made his marginal comments
as he went. But, notice this is somebody
who even though print copies of this
book exist,
uh is so much in the manuscript world
that he's happy to spend um months,
probably,
copying out and making his own custom
improved version of this text that he
can then work from.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh even though inevitably new print
copies will come out in a few years that
may have the very corrections that he's
working with, but he isn't going to wait
for that and he's not sure. So, he makes
his
version. And so, he's from this moment
when print and manuscript are parallel
technologies that we're using at the
same time. And the very people who are
buying the first printed books are also
producing manuscripts imitating those
printed books and influenced by those
printed books.
>> Mhm.
I want to think about the impact that
having this copy of Livy, which
presumably is one of the very few books
that young Machiavelli had access to,
influences his intellectual development.
And basically, yeah, we have this mode
of scholarship at the time where
you know, why does he spend like two
decades writing Discourses on Livy?
Presumably, unlike us where we can
listen to go through an audiobook a week
or something or have our Kindle at night
that we're reading and so forth. He's
just like reading this book again and
again and again and is trying to connect
it to the events he's seeing in his own
life.
>> Yeah.
>> Um on his like with 10th reread. That I
feel is a in very interesting
psychologically in understanding how
scholarship and intellectual thought
must have been different at that time as
compared to now.
>> you know, Machiavelli can easily access
other books by visiting friends, uh by
asking to go to the library of his
Medici patrons when he's working for the
Medici, of his Soderini patrons when
he's working for the Soderini. But
that's different from having it at home
and being able to have it at your
bedside and and look at it at all hours
and have this intimacy with it and it's
your father's copy and it's your copy.
Another
part of that though, and this is
kind of weird for modern people to
understand. In the Renaissance, there is
so much enthusiasm for antiquity, right?
Antiquity is the cutting-edge thing.
Antiquity is where it's at. Antiquity is
uh how we're going to end the chaos of
the previous world and have this new
world where we're basing everything on
ancient Rome. There's going to be peace.
There's going to be a golden age. It's
all coming from an imitating antiquity.
Therefore,
if your book is a comment on an ancient,
it is going to be way more popular and
sell way better and people will care
more and think more of you than if your
ideas are original. Nobody wants
original ideas. Original ideas are out
of vogue. Original ideas are dead. All
ideas need to be from the ancients. And
so a Renaissance scholar will bend over
backwards to pretend that his beautiful
original ideas are actually Livy or are
actually Plato or to couch them as a
commentary on these things because
that's going to have a way bigger
audience and be more popular and taken
more seriously than if it's original,
right? So if there are points where
Giordano Bruno and his commentaries on
Aristotle claims that Aristotle says
things absolutely Aristotle does not,
the opposite of what Aristotle says. But
if he claims it's Aristotle, people will
take it more seriously. The most extreme
version of this instance is the
brilliant and fascinating figure of
Annius of Viterbo who um Tony Grafton
has a great book about. Annius of
Viterbo had this radical vision of how
he wanted to rethink history and faked
ancient text. He made them up.
Uh and he faked archaeological digs. He
would secretly bury artifacts and then
dig them up to great drama.
And forged antiquities to create this
book that advanced his visionary
original idea of ancient history because
if he pretended he got it from
antiquity, people would take it more
seriously than if it was an original
book.
So Machiavelli's Discourses on Livy are
his big bid to have a popular,
important, prestigious thing because
Discourses on Livy are a bigger deal and
more important and more interesting to
everybody and more likely to sell and
get attention than a Florentine history
or a treatise of original thought on
princes. Who wants that? Uh that's a
very niche kind of thing. Discourses on
Livy, oh exciting, we have to have this.
And this goes on for the next century.
So um
for example, huge amounts of radical
political thought including, believe it
or not, commentaries on Machiavelli
have been in the footnotes in editions
of Seneca and Livy
uh where the text of Seneca will be, you
know, a small square in the middle of
the page and then there will be these
masses of footnotes and commentary and
huge original moments of political
thought for the entirety of the 1600s
are going on in wars in footnotes and
additions of Seneca. Uh, but it's not
original thought. It's all about Seneca
because that was what was in vogue then.
>> Huh.
>> Um, and the vogue of scholarly stuff is
shifts fast and is very interesting. And
this is one of the weird reasons that
uh, Renaissance philosophy and
Renaissance innovative thought with the
exception of a couple of oddball works
like The Prince
gets sort of pushed out of the history
of philosophy, especially in the 19th
century because when you get to the 19th
century, the vogue is everything has to
be original. The philosopher should be
born, you know, his ideas should be born
like Athena fully formed from the head
of Zeus. The ideal philosopher lives in
a cabin by the raging sea contemplating
in the wilderness.
Uh, and what they want is original
treatises. And if you look at a 19th
century historian of philosophy, they'll
say, you know, in the Renaissance there
was almost no original thought. There
was Machiavelli's Prince and there was
maybe uh, a little bit of Giovanni Pico
della Mirandola's Oration on the Dignity
of Man. Parenthesis, we have since
proved it's not an oration and it's not
about the dignity of man. Um, and these
things are like the the few lights in
the darkness and everything else in
Renaissance philosophy is, here's a
quote from a philosophy department
person who actually said this to me,
"The Renaissance is 200 years of people
being wrong about Plato."
And a lot of people look at it and you
read it and then and you pick up Ficino
and he's like, "Plato said these
things." And you're like, "No, Plato
totally did not say those things at all.
That's absolute gibberish. No, Plato
didn't say that. What are you saying,
Ficino?" And if you think Ficino is what
he says he is, a commentary on Plato,
then indeed the Renaissance is 200 years
of people being wrong about Plato, being
wrong about Livy, being wrong about
Aristotle.
Uh, but if you realize that what it is
is their
style guide requires original thought to
be presented in the form of a commentary
on an ancient.
What it is is 200 years of original
thought using the ancients as the
trellis up which the rose climbs in
order to bloom.
>> Mhm.
>> Uh and when you restore that and realize
that and and recognize that in order to
get at the real Renaissance, you need to
not read the goofy outlier works like
Machiavelli's Prince, which present
themselves as original, which is a weird
thing to do, but read the commentaries
on Livy.
That's where the original stuff is
hidden.
Uh by pretending and claiming and
sometimes sincerely convincing
themselves that this is the secret coded
true meaning of the ancient thing. Like
Ficino, the translator of Plato,
definitely genuinely believes that all
of the incredibly original cosmology and
magic that he's figured out is secretly
coded in Plato. And he's wrong, it's
not. Uh it's so adorable that he really,
really believes it is. Uh but what it is
is an incredibly original uh vision of
the universe that he got from reading
Plato and thinking hard about it and
combining with other things. So, he
presents it as commentary on Plato,
commentary on Diogenes the Areopagite.
Uh so, that's that's core to why this is
a discourse on Livy because this is what
a scholar is supposed to be doing is a
discourse on Livy. And all the other
things Machiavelli does are sort of
second-tier weird things for a scholar
to be doing on the side of Discourses on
Livy.
>> Mhm.
Okay, so a don't Machiavelli is now
seeing some of his works start to get uh
mass-produced. Uh what is his reaction
to this?
>> At first, excitement, but also horror
because Machiavelli is facing this
fascinating moment in the history of
being an author when printing has come
into being, but there isn't copyright
yet.
Uh so, in the manuscript period, there's
no such thing as copyright. And if you
find out that someone has made a copy of
your book, you say, "Oh, thank God.
There's another copy of my book.
That reduces the chances of it being
completely destroyed in a fire.
Making one copy of a book is six months
of incredibly difficult labor. You're
just grateful every time a a text is
reproduced. But when it comes printing,
then you have this experience which
Machiavelli is one of the first men ever
to have of finding out that a local
printer is printing a work of his
without ever having asked him, without
ever having talked to him. And he looks
at it and it's full of typos and minor
errors and he's panicking in these
letters and saying, "Oh no, everyone's
going to think I'm a bad scholar. There
are all these little mistakes in the
text and they aren't me. They're the
compositor having made typos when
setting it up and no one will know that.
They'll blame me and it'll destroy my
reputation. What do I do? There's
nothing I can do because there's no
legal process and no legal recourse.
Printing has just come into being."
And it's neat seeing him and friends
writing to each other about like, "What
can I do about the fact that this
printer has printed my book asking me?
There is no
law. There is no apparatus. There is no
anything." And his friends are like,
"Well, write letters to everybody who
matters and tell tell them that the
typos aren't you. That's all I can
suggest cuz they don't have the idea of
authorial copyright yet. It's going to
come in in the next couple decades.
And
the weird thing is how this gets
entangled with censorship and copyright
and censorship are born together
in Machiavelli's world
counter-intuitively from the
Inquisition. Because when the
Inquisition begins book censorship after
1515, which is during Machiavelli's
lifetime,
their policy that the um
Catholics are promulgates is before you
may print any text, you must take it to
an authority licensed by the church to
do this,
meaning an inquisitor or a bishop, and
they must read it and give permission
for it to be printed. And this is so
that they can make sure there isn't
heresy in it. So, all books are
effectively born pre-banned until you
get permission for them to be printed.
And
in return for this, you get a monopoly
license and only the printer that did
the process of taking the book through
the process can print it and you may now
use the actual Inquisition record of you
having gone through censorship as the
document to prove that you and only you
have the right to print the book and
therefore you can sue people for
plagiarizing it or printing an
unauthorized edition. And so, the very
first version of copyright is the
Inquisition.
And places outside the Catholic world
then, like England,
uh look at this and there's actually
popular demand in England for
censorship. When they say, "Hey, we need
what the Inquisition does cuz the
Inquisition is so cool. They let
printers have a monopoly on printing a
book and they let authors
deny print permission. Uh we need
something like that." And the very first
version of what is not yet copyright
passed in England, which is of course
the ancestor of what applies in all
Commonwealth nations and in the US, was
originally an imitation of uh the
Inquisition and it was, "Okay, you need
a license before you can print your
thing and then in return you get
monopoly." Later when there was freedom
of the press push and I'm by later I
mean this is happening over the course
of the first half of the 1600s.
So, a
bit less but about a century after
Machiavelli's death.
So, it takes a century for all this to
get ironed out. Um
the first version of copyright law is
them basically saying, "Okay, well,
we're going to keep the copyright half
of censorship while getting rid of the
censorship half of censorship or
changing the censorship half of
censorship." But, it's all born out of
the Inquisition having met this weird
demand that you feel in Machiavelli
where he's like, "They printed my book.
They did a bad job. There's nothing I
can do.
Help. Authorities, give me some way to
do something about this." And so, that's
where you could feel Machiavelli as one
of the first generation that that needs
copyright that will then be born in the
aftermath.
>> Fascinating. And what was the
Inquisition's incentive to enforce the
author's prerogative on the text?
>> Partly, the Inquisition does it because
that encourages authors to come to them.
It makes people much more willing to
collaborate with their process. But
also, think of an individual inquisitor
as an individual person who lives in a
place and needs to have relationships in
that place and needs to have an income
and who is not usually getting enough to
live on from the Inquisition itself. If
you're working for the Inquisition,
you're an officer of the Inquisition,
you're probably a Dominican monk, you
get some support from the monastery, but
you have reason to want money and you
have family, they want money. You're as
pragmatic and self-serving as any other
average human. So, the fact that people
want to have this positive relationship
with you, they might gift you some
bottles of wine in return for you being
extra generous in your reading of their
text. They also have to negotiate with
authorities.
One thing the Inquisition wants us to
think of it as very centralized and very
monopolar, right? The Inquisition, the
Vatican, it controls everything, which
is completely untrue and is
propagandistic. The Inquisition is
overseen by a whole bunch of isolated
guys who are in isolated towns and it
takes weeks or months to even
communicate with the Vatican and they're
making their own decisions. And for the
most part, they don't have their own
large amount of funding, they don't have
their own officers to jail people, they
don't have their own jails, they don't
have their own authority to arrest
directly. They get all of those from the
local government. They collaborate with
the local government. Which means if the
local government likes them and is
pleased by them and is like, "Ooh, the
Inquisition, I can use this to scapegoat
my enemies." Then the local government
will drown the Inquisition in funding
and give them all the guards and all the
incentives they could want. So when we
hear about the infamous Spanish
Inquisition, which everyone was
expecting me to mention,
uh the Spanish Inquisition is infamous
because Ferdinand and Isabella of Spain
really want to scapegoat the uh Jewish
and Muslim populations that they're
anxious about. So they throw money at
their Inquisition and really cultivate
and make it big and that's coming from
them. It's not coming from Rome.
Meanwhile, if you're in somewhere like
Florence where the Duke, uh if it's
early Medicean ducal Florence, right,
when this is happening, is, you know, a
Medici, he's in deep with the weird
Ficinian Platonic soul projection magic
people. He's a intellectual radical
descended from intellectual radicals.
His court is full of intellectual
radicals. And here you are, the
inquisitor, and you're like, "Your
grace, can I arrest this guy?" And he's
like, "No, that guy works for me. You
can't touch him." Um and uh you can only
arrest as many people as the Duke will
give you funding for or the local
republic will give you funding for. So
you need to please the local government
if you're the inquisitor. And we have
letters of inquisitors complaining, you
know, "This is a really liberal Duke.
He's protecting all of these heretics
around him and there's nothing I can do
about it because I depend on the local
authority for my ability to do stuff."
So this is a really bizarre comparison,
but think of the Inquisition operating
kind of like Doctors Without Borders.
It's a It's not the government. It's an
international organization that's set up
to try to achieve a goal that it
believes is beneficial in different
places, but it's only as strong as or as
weak as the government's willingness to
collaborate with it. And if the
government collaborates with it, it can
be enormously powerful in an area and do
a lot. If the government is hostile to
it and starves it of resources and
doesn't let its people in and insists on
pushing it out, then you can get bubbles
where the Inquisition is nearly
impotent. And every time they want to
arrest someone they have to go to the
Duke's agents, and if the Duke's agents
keep saying no, they can't do anything.
What this really creates is bubbles of
privileged access where if you're in
with the government, you can be as
heretical as you like, and the
Inquisition can't touch you.
This is also a lot of how homosexuality
operates at the time. If you are in the
protection of a powerful person, they
can prevent the Inquisition or other
officers of the church from getting you.
They just won't do it, and they're more
powerful than those agents are, so um
uh they can't touch you. There's a
really neat letter where Machiavelli and
some of his gay friends Machiavelli was
I would say very definitely solidly
bisexual in that this is a man who
recreationally had boyfriends and
girlfriends throughout his life that he
writes to. We have homoerotic poetry, we
have heterosexual poetry. He's
definitely very excited by both sexes.
Uh and he has a lot of gay friends. And
he and his gay friends are writing back
and forth about how at this particular
moment in Rome, one of the agents in
charge of Rome's sort of enforcement is
really cracking down on homosexuality,
and therefore all of their gay scholar
and artist friends are rushing to get
jobs working for cardinals.
Cuz if you work for a cardinal, nobody
can touch you.
Uh and
uh that almost all of their friends have
succeeded in getting jobs working for
cardinals except for one. So he has
resorted to hiring two prost- female
prostitutes to hang out with him all the
time and make him seem straight.
Uh by having him hang out with
>> [laughter]
>> with uh with sexy courtesans uh to
defend himself against charges of
homosexuality. Heresy and homosexuality
operate very similarly in this period.
They're both sort of forbidden by the
same things and policed by the same
structures.
And so if you work for the cardinal, or
you work for the Duke, you can be doing
very radical magic, radical philosophy,
radical politics, radical sexuality, and
nobody in authority can touch you
because authority is trumped by a higher
authority that is protecting you. This
is part of the patronage system.
>> And and how does that come back to the
copyright?
>> So, the way that comes back to copyright
stuff is the Inquisition needs to please
local authorities
in order to get to operate at all. And
so, the Inquisition will therefore try
to figure out things that will please
local authorities. And if a book is
being presented for publication that has
a, you know, recommendation letter at
the beginning written by an important
political figure, the Inquisition will,
you know, push it through. And when
printing presses and authors say, "Hey,
can we have this be a monopoly license?"
figures like Machiavelli realize we
could ask for, "Hey, you're giving us
permission. Can you deny everyone else
permission?" The Inquisition immediately
realized this is a great way to get
publishers on our side, to get authors
on our side, and to get their bosses on
our side because we are protecting the
book that is important to the duke
because it's dedicated to the duke or
it's dedicated to his grandfather.
Remember, the Medici give permission to
print The Prince partly because it's
dedicated to a member of the family and
it celebrates their fame. They want to
be able to control its quality and make
sure that it's published in good quality
and that it always has that dedicatory
letter at the front. They have an
incentive to control what we now think
of copyright. The Inquisition wanting to
please them has an incentive to give
them that control.
>> To close off on Do you have some sense
of how to think about why Machiavelli is
remembered so differently from
not only what he wrote, but why he was
writing?
>> So, sometimes in the history of thought,
there are authors
who become separated from their work,
and you have a parallel where there is
the actual content of what the person
did and said. And separately, there is
the idea of this person.
>> Mhm.
>> In the case of Machiavelli, right, we
have Machiavelli the patriot,
Machiavelli who did all this work. And
separately we have Machiavellian, right?
The murderous Machiavel as Shakespeare
calls him, Old Nick, which is a nickname
for the devil, but become popular
because Nick called him Machiavelli, Old
Nick, literally a synonym for the devil.
And he splits. So that the idea of
Machiavelli, the Machiavellian
villainous figure that, you know,
Shakespeare's Richard the Third invokes
as someone he's modeling himself on, is
useful to people as a character, as an
idea. The idea of the scheming
politician who is probably atheistic,
definitely self-serving, and who wants
nothing but to advance himself in power,
which of course isn't
the the the real Machiavelli if you read
the work. The real Machiavelli is not
about advancing yourself. It's not a
manual for getting ahead, right? It
shouldn't It shouldn't be shelved next
to How to Win Friends and Influence
People because it's a manual not of how
to gain power, but of how to keep power.
If you have a government want it to be
stable and protect the people's lives,
do this. But the idea of the murderous
Machiavelli is very exciting. And this
happens at other times to other
intellectual figures. So it happens to
Thomas Hobbes in the face of Thomas
Hobbes as the beast of Malmesbury. And
the idea of Thomas Hobbes sort of
separates. It happens fascinatingly to
Spinoza.
Spinoza, an important radical Jewish
thinker of the um
later 17th century.
And Spinoza is a neat one because when
you actually read Spinoza,
he's a lot He's really warm and sweet
and like Machiavelli, passionate and
cares about people. And in his case he's
incredibly pious theist.
He's a monist. He believes the entire
universe is the the body of God. You are
part of God. The table is part of God.
The camera is part of God. Everything is
God. Isn't that great? Um but
a fact about Spinoza, and I know this
feels tangential, but it's not. A fact
about Spinoza was that he was the first
person in ages and ages to be
targeted with the Jewish equivalent of
excommunication. These sort of
ceremonial, your radicalism is too
radical. We are expelling you from the
community of Jews. A such a rare
ceremony that the Jews of his region
actually had to send somebody traveling
all around Europe to find a Jew who knew
the ceremony because it was so
incredibly rarely done. And the fact of
that spread around and people had the
idea of, "Ooh, Spinoza must be even more
weirded and and heretical than any
heretic if even the Jews would expel
him." And the idea of Spinoza the
arch-heretic becomes a character and
everyone talks about Spinoza the
arch-heretic. And then you read him and
it's nothing like it. Um but sometimes
the character is useful, right? The
idea, the thought experiment figure of
Machiavelli the villain
is useful for our philosophy and we'd
like to talk about what is a
Machiavellian self-serving politician.
What would they do?
Um and this be- has a separate life from
Machiavelli's real ideas, right? To the
degree that all the way through the 16th
century there's these amazing
discussions of Machiavellianism in Spain
where they're talking about the Jews as
Machiavellian.
And Machiavelli as the prince of the
Jews. And you're like, Machiavelli was
in no way a Jew at all. But what they
mean by Machiavellian and by Jewish is
like somehow the political thought that
is undermining our good Catholic Spain,
right? And so Jewish and Machiavellian
could become synonyms. Mad as that is
for us. Because for them both of these
are labels for the sinister underground
of thought. And now we're talking about
the sinister underground of thought. The
idea of Machiavelli as the villain is
itself enchanting and interesting. And
as we look at when Machiavelli is
invoked in the modern day, when the
prince sits on the shelf and it feels
like something exciting to buy and to
read and to think of as a manual of
getting ahead, when having it on your
shelf makes it feel like you're
participating in the idea of strategic
advancement
and rationalism, that's much more
Machiavelli the character, you know, old
Nick, than it is the Niccolo Machiavelli
who faithfully sat in exile willing to
give up wealth, fame, society, the
ability to visit his wife, anything in
order to serve his country. And to me, I
think
even more than looking at either old
Nick, the fictitious Machiavellian
villain villain, or Machiavelli the
patriot, is to look at how did we double
image this? And what is the fascinating
tendency of our society to take
something real, powerful, exciting,
intimate, and then say, "But we can also
make
the character,
and the character is itself
interesting." So, if you take away a
main message from this with Machiavelli,
it's Machiavelli the character of
thought experiment is an important
backbone of our society. We use him as
we think about politics. Machiavelli the
actual innovator is a different backbone
of our society and how we think about
politics. And if Machiavelli can be two
such different things,
old Nick and Machiavelli the patriot,
so many other things we encounter in
life have actually been teased apart by
our social utility and made into
multiple things, which are useful to us
in different context.
So, that and if you have The Prince on
your shelf,
read it and remember it was written by
somebody who is willing to give up
anything to serve his country, and
you'll see a very different Machiavelli
come through.
>> I think that's an excellent place to
close. Ada, thanks so much for hopping
on.
>> This was a pleasure, as always. I hope
it won't be the last time.
>> I hope so, too.